Asymmetry in Civic Information: An Experiment on Tax
Participation among Informal Firms in Togo∗
Moussa P. Blimpo Paul Castan˜eda Dower
University of Toronto University of Wisconsin-Madison
March 2025
∗Acknowledgements: We thank David Evans, Marcel Fafchamps, William Gentry, Susan Godlonton, Markus
Goldstein,andLeonardWantchekonfortheirinsightfulcommentsandsuggestions. Thankstoseminarparticipants
at the American Economic Association’s 2019 Annual Meeting, New York University’s 2019 Econ Alumni Confer-
ence,2018AfricaMeetingoftheEconometricSociety,AfricanSchoolofEconomics,Universit´eofLom´e,University
of Minnesota, Williams College, George Washington University, the Center for the Study of Diversity and Social
Interactions at the New Economic School, and the Free Market Institute at Texas Tech University. Special thanks
toKassimDogawa,JulesAhlin,Herv´eAkinocho,Ez´echielDjallo,andstaffattheCenterforResearchandOpinion
Polls(CROP)inLom´eforhostingthestudy. Castan˜edaDowerwishestoacknowledgethesupportoftheMinistry
of Education and Science of the Russian Federation, grant No. 14.U04.31.0002. The findings, interpretations, and
conclusionsexpressedinthispaperareentirelythoseoftheauthors.
1

Abstract
In low-income countries, a substantial informational wedge exists between
thestateandfirmsregardingthefiscalcontract,especiallyformicroenterprises
in the informal sector. We conducted a randomized controlled trial in Lom´e,
Togo,totesthowimprovinginformalfirms’understandingofthefiscalcontract
affects tax participation. The intervention trained firms on the tax code and
the purpose of taxation to capture the reciprocal nature of taxation that is
central to modern states. We find that the intervention, counterintuitively,
decreasedthenumberoffirmsactivelypayingnonzerotaxamounts,but,inline
with our expectations, increased economic activity and tax revenue collected.
Werationalizethesefindingswithasimplemodelandshowthati)low-revenue
firms,empoweredtochallengetaxofficials’assessmentsoftheiractualrevenue,
are less likely to pay and ii) high-revenue firms, encouraged to self-declare
ratherthanhidingtoavoidpayingtaxes,aremorelikelytopay. Thesefindings
suggest that empowering informal microenterprises by addressing their deficit
in civic information can enhance economic activities and generate higher total
tax revenues without necessarily widening the tax base.
JEL Classification: H2, O1, O170, L530
Keywords: Taxation, informal sector, civic information, experiment
2

1 Introduction
Inlow-incomecountries, governmentsfaceconsiderableinformationconstraintswhen
dealing with micro and informal enterprises (MIE) (La Porta & Shleifer 2016), which
often constitute the largest share of economic entities. At the same time, these MIEs
typically lack basic knowledge about their obligations to the state and how the gov-
ernment functions (Araujo-Bonjean & Chambas 2004). While the majority do not
pay taxes, even MIEs that regularly pay taxes can do so without an elementary un-
derstanding of their tax responsibilities or how tax revenues translate to government
expenditures (Blimpo & Castan˜eda Dower 2023).1
Asymmetric civic information about the fiscal contract can lead to socially unde-
sirable outcomes for MIEs in low-income countries.2 First, firms may fail to under-
stand the reciprocal nature of the fiscal contract and consequently not participate
in the tax system. Asymmetric civic information can thus thwart crucial gains in
state legitimacy that come from tax participation because firms either do not pay
taxes or pay them without a basic understanding of the fiscal contract (Weigel 2020).
Second, firms may reduce economic activity due to tax-related uncertainty. As firms
face more uncertainty about the costs of operating in the open, we would expect to
see more effort to hide economic activity, an essential driver of inefficiency in the in-
formal sector. Third, firms may not be aware that they are being unfairly taxed and,
1A standard assumption in the literature is that civic information improves with greater par-
ticipation (Ali et al. 2014 , Gauthier and Reinikka 2006 , Khan et al. 2016). In our context, this
assumption is clearly not be appropriate.
2High-income countries can also face asymmetric civic information, possibly due to rational
ignorance, but the ill effects tend to be minimized through a reliance on third-parties’ knowledge,
such as when a firm hires a tax accountant.
3

due to standard informational asymmetries regarding firm activity, tax collectors
may, unwittingly or strategically, enforce tax obligations in ways that are contrary
to what is formally required. As a consequence, taxation practices on the ground
may potentially be in conflict with tax laws (Khan, Khwaja & Olken 2016, Gordon &
Li 2009), e.g., MIEs with minuscule profits paying as much taxes as highly profitable
MIEs.
Using a representative sample of 383 MIEs in Lom´e, Togo, we randomly assigned
an intervention that trained firm owners about their tax obligations and the benefits
of paying taxes to 191 firms, with the remaining MIEs serving as the control group.
The intervention is designed to improve firms’ knowledge about the fiscal contract
and, subsequently, improve tax participation. Unlike in developed countries, where
tax avoidance or evasion (intensive margin) is the central issue, tax participation
(extensive margin) is a first-order problem in many developing countries with large
informalsectors. Participationdependsuponhowvisiblythefirmschoosetooperate.
Accordingly, we assessed the effect of the intervention on both tax payment and
economic activities shortly after the close of the tax season.
We first show that firms in the treatment group have improved their knowledge of
the fiscal contract. After having been treated, they are more likely to possess correct
knowledge about their tax obligations and which types of taxes they are responsible
for as well as better connect tax payment with government performance. Next, for
our main set of results, we find that treated firms are less likely to pay taxes, with a
treatment effect ranging from -9.2 to -13.7 percentage points (or 22%-33% reduction
relative to the control mean) and statistically significant at the 10% to 1% levels
4

depending on whether and which baseline control variables are included.
To assess whether the impact of the treatment works through better knowledge
of the fiscal contract, we construct a variable that infers take-up of the intervention
based on a verification of their knowledge of the fiscal contract several months after
the training. The measure is the product of two indicators: whether the firm has
correct knowledge about its obligation to pay taxes and whether the firm associates
payingtaxeswithgovernmentperformance,openingthedoortogovernmentaccount-
ability. We obtain a local average treatment effect on the treated by instrumenting
the constructed indicator with treatment assignment. As expected, the 2SLS esti-
mate is negative, statistically significant and its magnitude ranges from 0.55-0.78,
suggesting a large effect for those whose knowledge of the fiscal contract changed
in response to the intervention. Overall, this indicates that overcoming asymmetric
civic information is challenging but doing so can have a large impact.
Despitethisreductionintaxparticipation, wefindthattheinterventionincreased
the economic activities of the MIEs. The intervention increased the number of open
orders on the day of the endline survey by 0.98 (a 58% increase relative to the
control mean).3 For average tax revenue paid, for which we relied on self-reporting
butrequiredverification via ataxreceipt, wefind apositive treatmenteffectof$4.49,
representing a 128% increase relative to the control mean (although there are a high
number of missing values on this variable). The increase in tax revenue collected,
3An open order refers to when a customer places an order for a service or a good, which is yet
to be delivered orcompleted. A partialadvancedpaymentis often made. For example, tailorstake
orderstosowclothes;carpenterstakeorderstoproducemattressesortables;mechanicstakeorders
to repair cars or motorcycles. The point estimates on estimated firm revenue, a noisier measure of
economic activity, are large (19%) but not statistically significant.
5

even though tax participation has decreased, is thus suggestive evidence that the
distribution of taxpayers shifted toward higher-revenue firms.
What explains these changes in tax payment behavior? Although a complete
establishment of the exact mechanism is beyond this study design, we rationalize
the set of main findings using a simple model that highlights the role of bargaining
power for low-revenue firms and conduct an exploratory investigation of the central
hypothesis of empowerment. In particular, we show that an increase in bargaining
costs redistributes the probability of audit from low-revenue firms to high-revenue
firms.
To explore this idea further, we show evidence of positive sorting. Firms with
relatively low revenue at baseline, determined based on revenue as a percentage of
the value of total assets, are less likely to pay taxes in the treatment group relative to
similar firms in the control group, even conditioning on a tax collector having visited
the firm. This positive sorting along firms’ revenues is consistent with the law’s
intention since what firms should be paying is closer to what they pay. Moreover,
when a tax official visits firms to collect taxes, the treatment group is less likely
to pay taxes than the control group, suggesting increased bargaining power due to
better knowledge of the social contract and tax code.
Tocomplementthisexploratoryanalysis, wealsoconductedin-depth, post-survey
qualitative interviews and a short quantitative survey to document the process of
change that treated firms underwent. The qualitative post-survey interviews of
treated firms confirm that a common explanation for not paying taxes is that “when
firms do not make money, they do not pay taxes.” This sentiment stands in stark
6

contrast to our pre-intervention survey that finds two-thirds of firms considered taxes
as somewhat or very difficult to predict in advance. Correspondingly, we also find the
treatment effect is more substantial for those firms that felt taxes were unpredictable
at baseline. The follow-up quantitative survey suggests that observationally similar
firms in terms of their tax history tend to arrive at their outcomes through different
processes depending on treatment status. For example, treated firms that pay taxes
are more likely to report self-declaring.
With these findings, we contribute to two strands of literature. First, a growing
number of papers have investigated the role of information and transparency using
randomized controlled trials (Kosack & Fung 2014). However, relatively few of these
papers examine taxation, an essential aspect of building state capacity, and none, to
our knowledge, has given attention to the tax behavior of MIEs, the largest category
of firms, also often assumed not to be paying taxes altogether because informality is
conflated with tax evasion (Besley & Persson 2013, Joshi & Ayee 2008). The closest
paper to our work is Mascagni, Santoro, and Mukama (2024), which evaluated the
impact of taxpayer education on compliance in Rwanda. They found greater com-
pliance, including reports of zero-tax amounts and documents that the mechanism
works through reduced compliance costs.
We argue that the focus on MIEs allows us to better study knowledge as power.
The literature typically studies providing information to citizens about their entitle-
ments (e.g., Banerjee et al. 2015, Reinikka and Svensson 2004). However, knowledge
may not empower citizens if there are pre-existing power imbalances that prevent
citizens from exercising their rights. Instead, we provide training about firm owners’
7

obligations to the state. Since the fulfillment of obligations depends upon the agency
and interest of the firm owners, knowledge can more easily transform into empow-
erment. In a related paper to ours, working at a more aggregate level, Timmons
and Garfias (2015) show a strong relationship between information revelation and
tax mobilization by examining how making municipal budget audits public affects
tax compliance among citizens. Since information about audits is still essentially
information about entitlements (i.e., citizens are entitled to a government free from
corruption), we build on this literature by showing an effect of information about
obligations to the state.
Second, we contribute to the growing literature on tax mobilization in developing
countries. Within this literature, there are lab experiments and several field exper-
iments on the determinants of tax compliance (see Mascagni (2016) and Antinyan
and Asatryan (2020) for reviews). Most tax experiments use nudges to induce tax
compliance, often focusing more on the deterrence of tax avoidance such as the like-
lihood of an audit. These studies find null or positive treatment effects depending
on the type of taxes and the context (Shimeles, Gurara & Woldeyes 2017, Mascagni,
Nell & Monkam 2017, Carrillo, Pomeranz & Singhal 2017, Pomeranz 2015, Brock-
meyer, Smith, Hernandez & Kettle 2019, Collin, Maro, Evans & Manang 2021).4
The field studies, both experimental and non-experimental are scant, especially in
Africa. We contribute to filling that gap, with an added emphasis on the extensive
margin of tax compliance relevant to the adoption of the fiscal contract. Bergeron
4A related strand of literature assesses the potential of the new information technologies to
enhance compliance (Awasthi and Bayraktar 2014, Ali et al. 2015, Okunogbe and Pouliquen 2017)
8

et al. (2021) also examine the extensive margin of property tax participation of reg-
istered property owners who are already implicitly adopting the fiscal contract. In
contrast, we do not rely on administrative data to identify firms and, consequently,
are not bound by the informational constraints of the state. When there is low state
capacity, Balan et al. (forthcoming) demonstrate that informational constraints on
stateactors aresevere, implying thatthose who areidentifiableby thestateare likely
to be different from those who are not.5 Our examination of the extensive margin
reveals an empowerment effect of information which is vital for the functioning of
the fiscal contract.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in section 2, we present the contex-
tual background and the intervention, section 3 discusses the research design, section
4 presents the main findings of the study, section 5 examines our rationalization of
the findings and section 6 concludes.
2 Context and description of the intervention
2.1 MIEs and tax compliance in Togo
Togo ranks high among African countries in terms of domestic revenue mobilization,
hovering around 20% of the GDP and reaching 22% in 2016.6 In the context of
Togo, some of the most critical challenges remain the tax participation among firms
5Arelatedmarginforfirmsintheinformalsectorisinformaltaxationbynon-stateactors(Jibao,
Prichard & van den Boogaard 2017, S´anchez de la Sierra 2020).
6A recent rebasing of the economy drove the ratio down. However, a uniform rebasing of the
economies in the region will likely leave Togo still among the top-ranked for domestic revenue
mobilization
9

in the informal sector and land and property taxation, both on the extensive and
the intensive margins.
Thecapitalcity, Lom´e, whereweconductedthisstudy, ishometoover1.5million
people in the greater metro area, more than a fifth of Togo’s population. The greater
Lom´e area is also the heart of Togo’s economic activities and home to 63% of firms
or economic entities according to 2018’s first-ever census of firms in Togo, accounting
for 71.4% of all employment. Additionally, a staggering 86% of the firms fall under
the government’s formal classification of informal firms - which is the population of
interest in this study. In Lom´e, 79% of the firms in the census are statutorily in the
informal sector. In Togo, this sector is required to pay taxes, both national and local
taxes.
Firmssuchasbarbers,carpenters,andtailorsusuallyconsistofanowner-operator
and several apprentices. Despite these firms’ small size, they are visible and long-
lived, often requiring a fixed work-space and an inventory of materials, and often
employ signage. In addition, many of these firms participate in the formal apparatus
of the state, either by paying official fees, obtaining official licenses, or paying taxes
on their economic activity.
At the time of this study7, the tax law classified all firms with revenues below
7As per the current law, following recent reforms after this study were completed, all firms with
revenues below 60,000,000 CFA (about $100,000) are now classified as informal. These firms are
furthersplitintotwogroupsfortaxpurposes. Firmswithrevenueabove$50,000butbelow$100,000
are under a regime called ”regime declaratif” and pay a flat tax rate as in the previous law (2%
and 8%). All firms below 30,000,000 CFA ($ 50,000) revenue are now under a ”Regime forfaitaire”
and pay a lump sum that varies by brackets of revenues. For example, all firms operating in the
service sector whose revenue fall between $0 and $5000 must all pay the same amount of $40. The
amount rises to $370 if the revenue exceeds $5000 but below $10,000. Given the low revenue range
oftheinformalmicroenterprises, thisreformeffectivelyappliesaspeciallumpsumptaxtothevast
majority of them. It removes much of the discretion of tax collectors to determine the revenue,
10

30,000,000CFA (about $50,000)8 under the ”informal” regime. These firms are sub-
ject to a synthetic tax called ”Tax professionelle Unique (TPU),” a single composite
tax that exempts them from most other regular taxes, including the value-added tax
(VTA). These firms must declare their revenues and pay a tax rate of 2.5% ( for firms
producing goods and or engaged in trade trades) or 8.5% (for services). The govern-
ment reserves the right to contest the revenue declared and conduct an audit. The
minimum amount to be paid cannot be lower than 6,000CFA ($12) and 12,000CFA
($24), respectively, for goods/trade and services. Since these firms typically do not
employ formal accountants (they are not required by law to do so), there is typically
a severe informational burden to establish the revenue and apply the tax code.
Governments in West Africa have designed tax policies to accommodate the wide
range of firm types that exist. In Ghana, for example, there is a tax stamp system
specially designed for firms in the informal sector. In Togo, the statutory laws offer
firms the option to declare the amount of revenue voluntarily and pay the taxes
accordingly. The authorities may contest the declaration and conduct an audit or
acceptitandassesstheamountoftaxesowed. Throughinterviewswithfirmsandtax
officials in our initial fieldwork, we learned that voluntary disclosure was extremely
rare. More common is the practice of a tax collector physically showing up at the
firm once a year, and assessing a tax amount based on the firm’s assets and size,
often determined by a glance around the shop. Since the formal law requires firms
to pay according to their revenue (or profits if firms can submit formal accounting
but it is also now structurally regressive as lower revenue firms pay an 10 equivalent larger share
of their revenues.
8For simplicity, we use an exchange rate of 500CFA for $1.
11

of them), tax officials, due to information constraints, must approximate a firm’s
revenue in order to adhere to the tax code. Instead of directly asking, tax officials
estimate a firm’s revenue in ways that lack transparency. They do this, in practice,
by calculating expected revenues, relying both on information specific to the firm
(visible assets, general firm appearance) and prior information on how similar firms
have paid taxes or disclosed revenue. While this method may excel in its pragmatic
merit (the value of a firm’s assets strongly predicts our measure of revenue), tax
collectors could and often do intentionally or unintentionally overcharge firms. The
firm can either pay the tax amount demanded by the tax collector on the spot or, if
the firm cannot pay, the tax collector may seize an asset that can be later reclaimed
at the tax office upon payment.
Similarly, firms could engage in several mechanisms of evasion. First, firms might
hide assets or work orders or try to appear less busy than they are to record less
tax by tax officials. Second, tax collectors can take a bribe from the firm to avoid
tax payments. Since these firms have no tax identification number, tax collectors
have quite a bit of discretion concerning who owes taxes and what amount to charge.
Third, firms may physically hide or close down to avoid tax collector visits. Finally,
firms may negotiate with tax collectors to lower their payments, relying on social
pressure. Importantly, for any of these mechanisms, firms may or may not know the
actual amount of tax they owe and simply try to minimize the tax amount they give
to the tax collector. Additionally, having knowledge of what tax amount that they
owe is beneficial for their ability to bargain.
12

2.2 Intervention and theory of change
Our intervention consisted of training about tax obligations and benefits of taxation
to firm owners and society at large. The content included was based on the tax code
and our interviews with senior tax officials concerning information they would like
these firms to know. Along with their tax obligations, the treatment also consisted
of what taxes revenues are used for and the cost of these services. A sample packet
is shown in figures 1 and 2. The intervention represents the reciprocal nature of
taxation and the fiscal contract.
The research was based at the Center for Research and Opinion Polls, a research
think tank based in Lome. A team of enumerators composed of university students
received comprehensive training on the tax code. All enumerators sent to the field
had to pass an exam on the tax code, which consisted of working through different
firm-specific tax scenarios. Both national and local taxes were covered.
The treatment group was surveyed at baseline and endline. In between surveys,
these firms received an information packet and consultation. We then followed up
30 days later for individual consultations on the tax code and its application to the
firm. In addition, firms owners were asked to answer a few questions. Depending on
their response, the enumerators provided the relevant information if there were any
inconsistencies with the firm’s understanding of tax compliance. The control group
was surveyed at baseline and endline with no interaction ex interim. For reference,
the timing of the experiment is summarized in Figure 3.
Asymmetry in civic information is a significant policy concern for low-income
countries. Several scholars and policymakers have pushed for greater transparency
13

in governance in order to improve service delivery as well as to empower citizens.9
Firms operating in the informal sector are likely to suffer most from asymmetric civic
information since there is less accountability for acting in ignorance of this informa-
tion. Moreover, the majority of the firms that we study are located at the extensive
margin of taxation, where an improvement in information could dramatically influ-
ence overall tax compliance (as opposed to larger firms that, because of their size, are
easy to target, although they may evade taxes), both for the worse or better. Indeed,
when firms’ decisions are sensitive to civic information, a vicious or virtuous cycle
could emerge depending upon whether better information discourages or empowers
firms to comply with the tax rules.
Since MIEs commonly base their understanding of the tax system on their per-
ceptions of and experiences with collection practices, asymmetric civic information
can present challenges to tax mobilization when it distorts the social contract. For
example, if the tax law establishes a relationship between a firm’s profits and the
tax that they owe, but tax collectors assess tax obligations based on the firm’s fixed
assets, firms may be more likely to hide when they experience adverse shocks or
choose not to increase economic activity when they experience positive shocks.
From a theoretical standpoint, one would expect that the provision of knowledge
of taxation and the fiscal contract would reduce expectation mismatches, lead to
better experiences with tax officials and more positive attitudes toward tax mobi-
lization. These factors should lead to greater tax participation and lower the cost of
collection.
9The World Development Report, “Making Services Work for Poor People” calls for greater
transparency (World Bank 2004).
14

We note that the intervention merely improves civic knowledge and does not and
cannot solve the other informational asymmetries between firms and the state. In
particular, firms still have considerable control due to their private information on
their revenue and profit.
3 Research design
3.1 Sampling and randomization of treatment assignment
At the time of this study, Togo, like most African countries, did not have a census of
enterprises to serve as a sampling frame. Therefore, we first performed a survey of a
random and representative sample of 643 micro and informal firms located in greater
Lom´e. The survey questionnaire contained questions on firm characteristics such as
a complete description of assets, monthly expenditures and revenue, participation
in, and experiences with the local and national tax system. Additional components
of the survey concern the firm owner and are questions on civic engagement and
political participation.
Since exact addresses of firms were not known in advance, we adopted a sam-
pling technique employed by Afrobarometer across Africa, including several times
in Togo. Using census tracts as enumeration areas, we randomly selected 32 enu-
merations areas and starting points on the map (see Figure 4). Upon arriving at
the starting point, the enumerators start from the nearest junction and select five
businesses in each direction by counting businesses on both sides of the street and
selecting every fifth business they encounter. This method has consistently produced
15

a representative sample for Afrobarometer.
We used this database as our sampling frame for this experiment. We refine
the sample by dropping ambulant vendors whose tracking in an experiment is nearly
impossible. Wealsodroppedhighlyunderrepresentedtypesoffirmstogeneratemore
homogeneity among participant firms. Of the 499 remaining firms, we randomly
selected 424 firms and then randomly assigned half to treatment and half to control.
Back in the field about ten months later, enumerators were able to track a total of
383 out of 424 firms to start the experiment – a 90% rate. Missing firms include
closed firms, wrong records of addresses at the baseline as most of these firms do not
have an official address, firms with temporary locations that may have moved. None
of the firms refused to participate once located.10 The treatment group included 191
firms, and the control group consisted of 192 firms.
The original sample of 424 can identify a minimum effect size of 13.5 percentage
points (from a baseline outcome of 41% tax participation), with a statistical power
of 80% at a 5% significance level. With the final sample of 383 observations, the
minimum effect size increases slightly to 14.3 percentage points. The baseline data
allows us to gain additional statistical power by adding control variables, including
thebaselinevaluesoftheoutcomevariable. Assumingthatthesecontrolvariablescan
explain up to 30% of the outcome variable’s variation, the study will be adequately
powered to identify a minimum effect size of 12 percentage points.
10Two of the 212 firms assigned to the control group made initial contact with the enumerators
and tried to find time to complete the survey but were only able to complete a minor portion of
the endline survey.
16

3.2 Data
The analysis relies on survey data collected at baseline and endline in both treatment
and control firms. To maximize tracking at the endline, we further strengthened the
tracking mechanism at the baseline, with additional phone records of several people
related to the firm and detailed descriptions of the location by the enumerators. The
data, both at the baseline and endline, included detailed questions about the firms
and owners. We collectedinformation about their knowledge of tax rules, tax partici-
pation, andeconomicactivities. Wealsocollectedinformationaboutimplementation
in the treatment firms only. All the training of firm owners and data collection were
conducted by qualified enumerators who passed a comprehensive exam on the tax
code.
At the endline, we successfully reached all 383 firms, 192 in the control group
and 191 in the treatment group.
Since our primary focus is tax participation at the extensive margin, the primary
outcome of interest is a dummy variable indicating whether the firm has paid taxes
during the last tax season. This variable tracks the extensive margin of tax compli-
ance since all firms in our survey must pay taxes. An obvious additional outcome is
the tax amount paid. We collected self-reported amounts paid, albeit with signifi-
cant missing values in part because we required evidence of payment in the form of
a receipt. We will nevertheless investigate the data we have on hand, assigning zero
to no evidence of payment.
The next set of outcome variables concern economic activity directly. The most
reliable and verifiable measure of economic activities is a measure of the open orders
17

on the day of the survey. Additionally, since we suspect that our treatment will have
differential impacts on high and low revenue firms, this measure offers a revenue-
neutral measure of economic activity. There is sufficient homogeneity in the types
of firms; most are in the service sector, which makes this measure a meaningful one.
We also look at firms’ estimated revenue during the month prior to the survey.
Direct questions about revenue, especially for firms who may not be currently paying
taxes, can be sensitive questions, and firms may elect not to answer such questions.
To estimate firms’ revenues, we first ask questions about the number of orders in
the past month, the value of the minimum and maximum order, and the value of
the two most recent orders and use this information to estimate a firm’s revenue.
These questions also give us an idea about revenue level and variability. Second, we
replicate what the tax authorities do informally by calculating the expected revenue
from a regression of the first measure of revenue on the firm’s assets.
3.3 Summary statistics and identification
According to the initial sampling frame survey, only 8% of firms are officially regis-
tered, while 41% pay taxes. While there are a variety of firms in the sample, they are
primarily tailors or embroidery (40%) and barbers or hairdressers (37%). Firms are
more likely to participate in the tax system if: firm owner is not poor (self-assessed),
has a higher number of dependents, is male, the firm has a higher value of assets,
and the firm has electricity. Surprisingly, the number of years of education is not
related. Nearly all firm owners, however, say that firms should pay taxes to the state
(Blimpo and Castan˜eda Dower 2017).
18

We asked firms which factors determine the amount of tax you pay? The factors
we asked about were revenue, profits, assets, the number of apprentices, the firm’s
appearance, ethnicity, political connections, or others. Nearly half (49%) answered
that they did not know whether a particular factor mattered at least once and about
a quarter of firms (24%) answered that they did not know for all factors. Figure 5
reports on firm owners’ knowledge. While about a third of firms identify revenue as
a condition, overwhelmingly, the assets and firm appearance are mentioned.11
Under symmetric civic information, we would expect greater participation to
be associated with better knowledge. Under asymmetric civic information, greater
participation may reinforce the wrong expectations. In table 1, using the baseline
survey, we explore whether firms that pay taxes are associated with less misinforma-
tion. Each column represents whether the firm perceives that the factor affects the
evaluation of their tax obligations. In this case, participation improving knowledge
is consistent with paying taxes at baseline being positively associated with the de-
pendent variables in columns (1) and (2) and negatively associated with all others.
Instead, we see a much different pattern. Not only are the associations positive for
columns (3) - (6), the magnitudes of the associations are largest for column (3),
which is the factor most likely to contribute to an evaluation in the informal practice
described to us by tax officials.
11Thirty-three firms select the option “Other” and specified factors that we had not anticipated.
Among those firms, 60% identified the rental cost of the firm’s facility as the main factor, and the
rest were split among several other factors, including the prominence of the neighborhood where
the firm is located or how busy the firm’s surroundings are.
19

3.4 Empirical strategy
The central identifying assumption is that the expected net effect of both unobserved
and observable variables (other than treatment assignment) is statistically similar
in the treatment and control groups. This is achieved through the randomization
process that we controlled. As is commonly done, we verify that the observable
characteristics of the firms and firm owners are balanced. In table 2, we present
results from running a regression of treatment status (an indicator variable taking
a value of one if received the intervention and participated in the endline survey
and zero if assigned to the control group and participated in the endline survey)
on several firms and firm owners’ characteristics measured at baseline. We then
run a simultaneous test of the null that these variables (or subgroups of them) can
be excluded to assess any systematic correlation with treatment status. According
to the F-statistics in columns (1)-(4), which correspond to simultaneous tests for
firm characteristics (1), firm owner characteristics (2), both (3) and both conditional
on firm type fixed effects (4), we fail to reject the null that these variables are
simultaneously orthogonal to the treatment assignment variable - indicating that the
randomization was successful and that the two groups are ex-ante balanced based
on observable characteristics, and balanced in expectation on unobserved variables.
A simple comparison of means between the two groups at the endline can therefore
be interpreted as causal.
We estimate the following regression to understand whether the treatment affects
tax participation:
20

y = α+π ∗Treatment +(cid:15) (1)
i ITT i i
where y is the outcome of interest (e.g., an indicator that a firm currently pays
taxes, the number of open orders and the amount of tax paid verified by receipt).
Treatment is determined by randomized assignment, and hence π is an estimate
i
of the intent-to-treat effect. For the benchmark estimate, we use the difference in
means. We also report the ANCOVA estimator with baseline tax participation. To
improve precision, we also include a set of control variables all measured at baseline,
which are a firm’s size and value of assets, whether a firm has electricity and signage,
the firm’s number of apprentices, an indicator of the firm owner having completed
primary education, firm owner’s age, marital status and number of dependents and
the firm owner’s self-reported poverty status and firm-type fixed effects.
To verify that this effect operates through changes in knowledge of the fiscal
contract, we construct a measure of take-up of the intervention. To do this, we
create a set of indicator variables that assign a value of one to a firm if the firm takes
up knowledge of the fiscal contract and zero otherwise. The first indicator is based
on knowledge of the tax code and is coded as one when the firm gives the correct
determinantsaccordingtothetaxlawattheendlinesurvey(Obligation). Thesecond
indicator is whether the firm specifies an opinion about whether taxes are being put
to good use. Firms can answer “Yes”, “No” or “I don’t know.” The variable then
indicates the firms that do not answer “I don’t know” since firms with an opinion
are more likely to view taxation as a fiscal contract (Accountability). The final
indicator is the product of the two previous indicators and represents whether the
21

firmunderstandsthereciprocalnatureoftaxation. Thetwounderlyingindicatorsare
positivelycorrelated,whichisreassuringandsuggestivethatthetreatmenteffectively
communicated both sides of the fiscal contract. Since a firm that demonstrates that
it knows the fiscal contract is likely to differ systematically from firms that do not, we
instrument for take-up with treatment assignment to get a local average treatment
effect. Thus, we estimate the following regression to understand whether knowledge
affects tax participation:
y = α +π ∗Knowledge +η PaysTaxPre +u (2)
i 2 LATE i 2 i i
Knowledge = α +ψTreatment +η PaysTaxPre +v (3)
i 1 i 1 i i
where y is an indicator that a firm currently pays taxes, we report results with
the ANCOVA estimator with baseline tax participation.
Finally, we explore channels of influence through heterogeneity analysis. We take
a factor X, measured at baseline, and interact it with the treatment variable to give
the following specification:
y = α+π ∗Treatment +X β +γ ∗Treatment ∗X +(cid:15) (4)
i i i i i i
22

where the marginal effect of the treatment is still the quantitative object of interest.
We are interested in how this effect varies at different values of the factor X.
4 Main Results
4.1 Impact on participants’ tax knowledge
We begin by examining whether the intervention in the treatment group translated
into better knowledge about taxation. Table 3 reports significant gains in knowl-
edge of the tax code by estimating equation (2), where the dependent variables are
various measures of knowledge of the tax code. The percentage of firms that can cor-
rectly designate two municipal and national taxes increased respectively by 23 and
24 percentage points from low means in the control groups of seven and three percent
(columns I and II). The first two of these measures of firms’ knowledge are particu-
larly relevant because the authorities were concerned, among other things, that firms
were confused about which taxes to pay and to whom. Specifically, we asked which
two (out of five options) of the following taxes are collected by the Mayor’s office
(Revenue Authority). As we see above, the treatment had an impact on selecting the
correct answer for both types of taxes, but we also see partial knowledge increase:
for the Mayor’s office, 97% of the treatment group had at least one correct response,
compared to 53% with at least one correct response in the control group; and for the
Revenue Authority taxes, we observe a similar pattern in the treatment group, 82%
had at least one correct response, compared to only 22% with at least one correct
response in the control group. These differences are striking evidence that the treat-
23

ment effectively transmitted knowledge that tax authorities themselves wanted firms
to know. In Column III, we report knowledge of an important tax for the visibility
of the firm. While 72% of the control group firms knew about signage taxes, the
treatment increased that number further by 24 percentage points.
In Column IV of Table 3, we show the results for the main emphasis of the
intervention, the share of firms who can identify the statutory factors that should
determine their tax burden. As discussed above, we measure this by whether the
firm possesses correct knowledge about the determinants of their tax obligations.
The treatment increased the firm owners’ knowledge by 17 percentage points or a
74%increaserelativetothecontrolmean. InColumnV,weexamineanotherrelevant
margin: the confidence that firms have in their knowledge of the tax system, whether
or not this information is correct. We can measure this by whether they report “I
don’t know” when asked about which factors determine their tax obligations. The
share of firms affirming at least one factor, whether it mattered formally or not,
was higher in the treatment group (76% compared to 67% in the control group).
Less reluctance to answer in the treatment group could signal more confidence in
understanding how taxation works. In Column VI, we find that the treatment makes
firms more likely to have an opinion, good or bad, about how the government uses
tax revenue. This is our measure of accountability since firms connect taxation
with their assessment of government performance. Finally, in Column VII, we show
the treatment increased knowledge of both aspects of the fiscal contract. Taken
together, we find solid grounds for the internal validity of the study and demonstrate
the sustained take-up of our intervention with treatment firms having dramatically
24

better knowledge and confidence even several months afterward.
4.2 Impact on tax participation
We find that firms in the treatment group are nine percentage points (a 23% de-
crease from the baseline) less likely to pay taxes than firms who did not (statistically
significantly different from zero at the 10% level), reported in column (1) of table 4.
Around 40% of firms in the control group pay taxes at endline, which is in line with
the 41% of firms that pay at baseline.
In the remaining specifications, we progressively add baseline control variables to
increase the precision of the estimates. In column (2), we add the baseline status
of tax participation. The coefficient’s magnitude increases by 38% and the standard
error decreases. Next, we include owner characteristics (column 3), then firm charac-
teristics (column 4), and finally firm-type fixed effects (column 5). In the last three
specifications, the point estimate is stable at 13.7 percentage points (or 33% of the
mean of the control group) and statistically significantly different from zero at the
1% level.
In table 5, we report the 2SLS estimates (Equations (2) and (3)), further relating
the impact to the intervention. The first-stage relationship is strong and has the
correctsignforeachofourindicatorsoftake-up. Again, weseethatbetterknowledge
of the fiscal contract leads to less tax participation. The magnitude of the coefficient
is large, suggesting that the tax participation decision is highly sensitive to the
treatment for those firms whose knowledge changed due to our treatment.
Another important piece of evidence that the treatment reduces asymmetric civic
25

information comes from firms’ knowledge of the taxes that they pay conditional on
paying taxes. Since all firms are responsible for paying TPU, we present in the table
6 the percentage of firms that report paying the TPU by treatment status. What
is striking is that the majority (60%) of the control group that reports paying taxes
do not know if they are paying TPU. In contrast, most (70%) of the firms that
report paying taxes in the treatment group report paying the TPU. This pattern is
broadly similar across the various other taxes that we asked firms about. Thus, tax
participation and the training are now better aligned in the treatment group than in
the control group that suffers from asymmetric civic information.
4.3 Impact on economic activities and tax revenues
Better knowledge of the fiscal contract should enable firms to operate more openly
and to form more reliable expectations about their business environment. The in-
tervention should then reduce hiding and increase economic activities.
We find that the intervention significantly increased the firm’s economic activi-
ties. The number of open orders on the day of the survey increased by 0.84 - 0.98
relative to the average of 1.7 active open orders in the control group, representing
up to an increase of 58%. The point estimates on the total revenue for the month
prior to the survey date are also large and positive but not statistically significant
(Table 7, columns 1 and 2). While the revenue report is subject to recall issues and
inaccuracies, the measure of open, active orders is much more precise and provides
strong evidence that the intervention enhanced economic activities among treated
firms. The reduced need to take avoidance measures is one likely channel through
26

which this effect operates. Interestingly, paying taxes at baseline is also associated
with greater economic activity, indicating either that these more visible firms were
targetedinthepastorthatthereisapositivefeedbackloopbetweentaxparticipation
and operating more openly.
We collected data on the amount of taxes paid to document the intensive margin
of tax participation. However, this measure was subject to many missing values
for several reasons, including the fact that we required the enumerator to confirm
the data through receipts. In addition, since more firms did not pay taxes, the
effective number of non-zero responses is lower than the baseline sample (41% paid
taxes at the baseline). Of the 60 firms that showed payment receipts, 27 were in
the control group, and 33 were in the treatment group. Therefore, we imputed all
nonpayments and missing values with zeros. With this caveat, Table 7, in columns
5-6, shows that the intervention increased tax payment by 3.52 - 4.45 dollars, more
than doubling revenue per firm relative to the control group with a base of 3.5 dollars
(accounting for the imputation of zeros for nonpayment and missing values). This
result is consistent with the greater targeting or self-declaration of higher-revenue
firms, which raises the total amount despite a decrease in the extensive margin. We
explore and explain these findings in the next section.
5 Rationalization
In this section, we propose a basic theoretical framework to help explain the findings
and derive additional exploratory results and insights from the data. Our rationale
27

remains centered on the hypothesis of empowerment, which stipulates that partic-
ipants’ improved knowledge of the tax code has increased their bargaining power
relative to tax collectors. Incomplete knowledge effectively limits a firm’s ability to
negotiate by denying access to legitimate arguments about why the tax bill should
be lower.12.
Consider a population of N firms engaged in various economic activities and
declaring earnings of 0 < y < y < ··· < y . In this context, these revenues are
1 2 N
considered proxies for profit. The firm must statutorily pay a flat tax rate τ.
Under the tax code, firms declare their revenues and get taxed on it, unless the
government contests the declaration and engages in an audit13. Assume that there
is a fixed cost, c, to conduct an audit that is funded with a total budget of ∆.
Because firms’ revenues are unobservable, a given firm is audited if the expected
revenue resulting from taxes and fines net of the audit cost is greater than accepting
the firm’s declaration. Assume that firms have the same propensity to under-report.
If a firm with revenue of y is audited, there is a probability q that the audit is
i
founded, in which case the firm pays the taxes owed on y(cid:48) in addition to a fine f.
i
Otherwise, the original declaration stands. Therefore, the government’s decision to
audit is determined by the following equation:
τy < −c+q(τy(cid:48) +f)+(1−q)τy (5)
i i i
12We have documented in the previous paper that over a quarter of the firms stated having no
idea at all about the basis upon which their tax bill is determined. The remaining firms pointed to
proxies such as their location or appearance; none referred to the tax code in the books (Blimpo
and Castan˜eda Dower 2019)
13Even though firms must file taxes, failure to file is customarily treated as if the firm declares
not owing taxes.
28

Which can be rearranged as:
y(cid:48) −y > (c−qf)/qτ (6)
i i
Without loss of generality, assume that the amount under-reported is a fixed fraction
α of y and rearrange the equation as:
i
y > (c−qf)/qατ (7)
i
Note that the government’s choice variables are f and τ while q, c, and α result
from the aggregate behavior of firms. For example, it is reasonable to assume that
q = n/N where n is the number of firms under-reporting. Therefore for a given q
and α, we have the following proposition:
Proposition 1 There exists a threshold for firms’ declared revenues, y¯ = (c −
qf)/qατ, below which government audits are not cost-effective. This threshold in-
creases with audit costs (c) and decreases with higher fines, tax rates, and under-
reported revenues (f, τ, α).
To map this proposition to the study, recall that this experiment did not seek
to directly change government policy but rather affects the government’s behavior
through the firm’s response to the experiment. We interpret our intervention as an
increase in the audit cost c. Training firms over the fiscal contract, particularly on
their rights and obligations, raised their bargaining power vis a vis the tax collec-
tor in this informal environment where the tax bill is often negotiated. As stated
in Proposition 1, it is thus expected that all else equal, the tax collector will target
29

fewer firms with lower expected revenues for audit since these firms are now informed
and presumably empowered to negotiate. Due to the majority of firms possessing
observable characteristics that would lead to relatively low expected revenue, it im-
plies an overall drop in participation on the extensive margin, as reported in our
average treatment effect. Besides the decreased participation, the proposition also
unequivocally suggests a change in the composition of participants, with a greater
share of expected high-revenue firms.
To explore this, let’s turn to the firm’s behavior, which we rationalize under
a multiple equilibria framework arising from positive complementarities. In this
context, the larger the share of firms not complying (n), the more strained the
enforcement resources and the lower the probability of enforcement on the next
defector – that is, the lower the expected penalty for the next firm to defect (see Bold
et al., 2017; Bold et al., 2019; Chaudhury et al., 2006; De Sardan, 1999; McPake et
al., 1999). If a firm chooses to comply, its take-home earnings is thus (1−τ)y(cid:48). If
i
it chooses to evade, there is a probability p(∆,n) that it is identified and audited,
where ∆ is the deterrence or enforcement budget the government set to promote
compliance and punish evasion, and, n is the number of firms who evade at that
point and it is credible that the government will audit them. Therefore, p(∆,n) is
in increasing in ∆ and decreasing in n and can be conditional on a set of observable
characteristics. The higher the enforcement budget the higher the likelihood of an
evader being audited and the more there are evaders the lower is the chance of each
being audited. An audited firm at fault must pay the tax owed on the revealed
revenues y(cid:48) = (1+α)y in addition to a fine f. With this setup, a non-complier i’s
i i
30

expected earning is therefore:
p(∆,n)[(1−τ)y(cid:48) −f]+(1−p(∆,n))y(cid:48) (8)
i i
and a firm will comply if the expected earning from compliance exceeds that of
non-compliance14:
(1−τ)y(cid:48) > p(∆,n)[(1−τ)y(cid:48) −f]+(1−p(∆,n))y(cid:48) (9)
i i i
This implies that for a given tax rate (τ), fine f and a deterrence budget (∆),
there is a revenue threshold above which firms do not comply. The threshold is
determined by:
y¯= fp(∆,n)/((1−p(∆,n))τ (10)
Therefore, for a given f, τ, we can state the following proposition:
Proposition 2 There is a threshold for a firm’s revenue above which non-compliance
becomes beneficial to the firm. This threshold increases with p(∆,n), the probability
of an audit.
The revenue threshold is increasing in f and in p, indicating that large-revenue
14Without loss of generality, we assumed here that non-compliance amounts to declaring zero
or evading. The result remains if the firm declares y instead of y(cid:48), in which case compliance is
i
determined by:
(1−τ)y(cid:48) >p(∆,n)[(1−τ)y(cid:48)−f]+(1−p(∆,n))[(1−τ)y +(y(cid:48)−y)]
i i i i
which can be simplified to
pf(1+α)
y(cid:48) <
i (1−p)ατ
31

firms are more likely to comply if the fines are stiffer or the likelihood of an audit is
higher. For illustration, as p approaches 1, either because of a larger ∆ or smaller n,
the revenue threshold goes to infinity, meaning all firms comply.
In the context of this experiment, ∆ is not into play as the government enforce-
ment budget was unaffected. However, as indicated in Proposition 1, p has increased
for large-revenue firms through a decrease in n due to a larger number of firms ef-
fectively entering the denominator as it is no longer credible for the government to
audit them. Since large-revenuefirms in thetreatment group can correctly anticipate
the increase in the probability of audit, they are more likely to pay taxes, changing
the composition of taxpayers. Together, these two propositions reveal a theory of
change consistent with our empirical findings. The intervention empowered MIEs,
shifting the tax official’s optimal targeting toward larger revenue firms. This target-
ing effect, in turn, increased the audit probability of larger revenue firms, inducing
greater participation among that subgroup.
We present supporting evidence in sections 5.1 and 5.2, namely evidence of
MIE’s greater bargaining power and change in the composition of the compliers with
increased larger revenue firms. Additionally, we present a corollary effect of these
two findings on the firm activities and tax revenues. One would expect increased
firm activity because of reduced avoidance measures, which often consisted of hiding
or temporary closures.
Thus, from the model, we learn that the effect of bridging the informational gap
may reduce tax participation in at least two important ways: i) by empowering
entrepreneurs to refuse to pay if the requested amount is much farther than what
32

they legally owe and ii) by making tax collectors more selective in the firms they
target, reducing the likelihood of a tax audit for smaller revenue firms.
5.1 Empowerment and MIEs’ increased bargaining power
Suggestive evidence of empowerment is presented in Table 8. When tax officials visit
firms, we see very different behavior in the treatment and control groups. Firms in
the treatment group are much less likely to pay taxes than those in the control group
conditional on a tax official visit. Firms that tax officials visit likely systematically
vary from those that are not visited. However, the probability of a visit by a tax
collector should be independent of treatment assignment. While the treatment itself
could affect the likelihood of a visit, the patterns that we observe are still instructive.
This evidence is supported by an investigation of treatment effect heterogeneity
with respect to how unpredictable a firm estimates taxes are to be pre-treatment. In
Figure 7, we see that those firms that found taxes unpredictable at baseline are less
likely to pay taxes at endline (statistically significant at the 5% level).
5.2 Increased shared of higher-revenue firms among payers
According to Proposition 1, in this economic environment with costly revenue verifi-
cation, some firms have expected tax revenues that are less than the cost of verifica-
tion. In such situations, tax enforcement is not credible and possibly would operate
counter to the spirit of the law. Thus, a negative relationship between tax participa-
tion and tax knowledge is consistent with the spirit of the law being implemented.
Firms with low revenues feel empowered to report that they should not pay, and
33

firms with high revenues are empowered to meet their tax obligation. Even though
tax participation declines, one could argue that tax compliance increases since the
difference between what is owed and what is paid likely decreases. Essentially, bet-
ter knowledge of the fiscal contract leads to better sorting firms who pay taxes, and
overall tax revenue could increase.
We present two pieces of evidence that this sorting occurs. First, we compare the
tax behavior of large revenue firms to small revenue firms. As Figure 6 shows, in the
control group, the proportion of firms that pay taxes is statistically similar for firms
with revenue in the upper quartile of the revenue distribution than for those in the
bottom three quartiles. In contrast, the upper quartile-revenue firms are more likely
to pay taxes than firms in the bottom three quartiles in the treatment group.
Importantly, the separation that drives the result in Figure 6 holds for those
firms that tax officials do not visit. We see no statistical difference between those
firms that pay and don’t pay taxes in the control group, whereas treatment group
firms that pay taxes have higher revenue, suggesting that treatment group firms are
empowered to self-declare when their revenue is high enough.
Second, a firm with a low ratio of baseline revenue as a share of the value of their
assetsis likelytohavebeen taxedunfairlyandexperienced thewedgebetweenformal
obligations and informal practices. Figure 8 demonstrates that, at a high ratio, the
treatment group firms behave statistically similar to control group firms, whereas,
at a low ratio, treatment group firms are less likely to pay taxes than control group
firms, suggesting that firms are now positively sorting into tax participation.
34

5.3 Ex-post investigation of process
To verify that the treatment mattered, we selected a group of treated firms that had
changed their tax behavior after the treatment and performed in-depth, post-survey
targeted interviews (14 in total). The interviews confirmed that firms learned impor-
tant civic information from our intervention. These firms also identified agency costs
and informational asymmetries as problems with the current method of taxation.
For example, when asked why firms do not currently pay taxes, a typical response
was that “when firms don’t make money, they don’t pay taxes.” Overall, these in-
terviews supported the view that improved civic information empowered firms to
implement the spirit of the law when the evolved informal practices would have led
to a sub-optimal outcome.
We complemented these in-depth interviews with a short quantitative survey of
121 firms (61 control, 60 treated), specifically designed to probe the internal contours
of the change initiated by the treatment. Here, our focus is on understanding the
process of arrival to a particular state or outcome in contrast to a causal effect that
instead captures to which states or outcomes treated firms have arrived. We grouped
ourfirmsintofourtaxpaymentpaths: thosethatpaidtaxesbothpreandpost, those
that did not pay taxes pre or post, and those that paid pre (post) but not both. We
then randomly sampled firms stratifying by each category, ensuring that control and
treatment group firms were selected with equal probability. By design, we compare
firms with observationally equivalent behavior to see if undergoing the treatment
is associated with different beliefs, perceptions, or interactions with the tax system
35

than the control group.15
Controlling for tax payment history, treated firms are 25 percentage points more
likely (the difference is statistically significant at the 1% level, p-value = 0.001) to
have self-declared their taxes (35% of firms report to have self-declared). This is
especially true of firms that had regularly paid taxes where most firms report having
self-declared.
Weaskedahypotheticalquestionconcerninghowafirmliketheirswouldgoabout
avoiding paying taxes. They would have to go into hiding during the tax collection
season; they would have declared that they had not earned any revenue; they would
havethoughtthattherewouldbelittlechancetheauthoritieswouldcomeafterthem,
or they would have done so inadvertently because they would not have known the
rules). Controlling for tax payment history, treated firms are 19 percentage points
more likely to report that the hypothetical firm would have declared that they had
not earned any revenue (reported 21% of the time) (statistically significant at the
1% level, p-value = 0.01).
Controlling for tax payment history, treated firms were no more likely to report
thattheyhadchangedtheirattitudetowardpayingtaxesinthepasttwoyears. How-
ever, conditional on a change in attitude (only 30% of firms report having changed
their attitude) and controlling for tax payment history, treatment firms are 30 per-
centage points more likely to say that knowledge of tax rules was the critical infor-
mation that affected this change (the difference is statistically significant at the 5%
level, p-value = 0.015). We also asked about their beliefs about how likely a tax
15Full results available by request.
36

agent would have visited this firm. Controlling for tax payment history, treatment
firms are 19 percentage points more likely to say a visit by the tax collector is highly
probable (the difference is statistically significant at the 5% level, p-value =0.018).
6 Conclusion
Asymmetry in civic information presents challenges to tax mobilization and formal-
ization. In this experimental study, we find that firm owners react strongly to an
intervention that revealed the fiscal contract. We find that firms in the treatment
group are less likely to pay taxes, the effect appears skewed toward lower revenue
firms, and the intervention increased economic activities and may have increased
overall tax revenues.
We theorize and present suggestive evidence that a better understanding of the
fiscal contract empowers firms to act in the spirit of the law in an environment with
information constraints. Firms with low revenue are empowered to confront visiting
tax officials about their lack of revenue, and firms with high revenue are empowered
to self-declare before tax officials visit. In this way, tax revenue may increase through
better sorting of tax compliance, even though overall tax participation declines.
Expanded economic activities in response to the treatment suggests that empow-
erment improved the relative bargaining position of firms, enabling them to operate
more openly (at least during tax time). This finding is consistent with the view that
the large informal sector is a significant source of additional tax revenues (Benjamin
and Mbaye 2010). Additionally, convincing firms with a greater propensity to hide
37

to now operate more openly and actively participate in the tax system should build
state capacity through enhanced legitimacy of the state (Weigel 2020) and may carry
a significant positive welfare gain by reducing the productivity gap between those
who pay taxes in the informal and formal sectors (La Porta and Shleifer 2014).
These findings demonstrate that we need to reevaluate the extent to which the
informal sector is an obstacle to development. In our view, the results show that
firms appear to adopt the fiscal contract, despite the limited level of formalization.
Future research could investigate in more detail these avenues and how citizens’ or
firms’ perceptions of the state affect economic behavior and to what degree these
interactions place constraints on the state. (Bergeron, Tourek & Weigel 2021) is one
step forward in this research agenda. While our findings point to the importance of
civic information for tax mobilization, we have not established how crucial voluntary
compliance is and what drives it (Allingham and Agnar 1972, James et al. 1992,
Slemrod et al. 2001, Chetty et al. 2014). If larger revenue firms are more likely to
self-declare due to the treatment, the importance of voluntary compliance could be
substantial, which can become a powerful source of holding the state accountable.
The results may also be consistent with several other explanations. First, the
tax rule revelation could have further exposed corruption, making firms less willing
to pay taxes. Second, firms could have learned that the audit probability is lower
than they thought, increasing the value of not paying taxes. Third, given that the
intervention included disclosing the use of tax money by the authorities, firms could
have learned that their taxes were not going toward their preferred services, again
making firms less willing to pay taxes. We explore these competing explanations in
38

the appendix and do not find supportive evidence for any of them. Nevertheless, we
cannot them rule out completely and call on future studies shed more light on them.
Finally, while the question of external validity should always be cautiously as-
sessed, our sample consists mainly of barbers and hairdressers, embroiderers and
tailors, and mechanics and vulcanizers – firms that are pretty common in the infor-
mal sector across Africa and elsewhere in the world. A more likely threat to external
validityconcernsthespecifictaxinstitutionsandpracticesthathaveevolvedinTogo.
Nevertheless, the findings in Blimpo and Castan˜eda Dower (2023) support the per-
tinence of asymmetry of civic information for other institutional contexts. In that
work, we find a striking similarity in tax behavior among similar types of firms in
Benin, where we document that asymmetry in civic information exists. Therefore,
we believe that our experimental results can inform policy beyond Togo.
39

References
Agnar, M. G. S. (1972), ‘Income tax evasion: A theoretical analysis’, Journal of
Public Economics .
Ali, M., Fjeldstad, O.-H. & Sjursen, I. H. (2014), ‘To pay or not to pay? citizens’ at-
titudes toward taxation in Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, and South Africa’, World
Development 46(C), 828–842.
Ali, M., Shifa, A., Shimeles, A. & Woldeyes, F. (n.d.), Information technology and
fiscal capacity in a developing country: Evidence from Ethiopia. ICTD Working
Paper 31, 2018.
Alm, J., McClelland, G. H. & Schulze, W. D. (1992), ‘Why do people pay taxes?’,
Journal of Public Economics .
Antinyan, A. & Asatryan, Z. (2020), ‘Nudging for tax compliance: A meta-analysis’,
CESifo Working Paper No. 8500 .
Araujo-Bonjean, C. & Chambas, G. (2004), Taxing the hard-to-tax: Lessons from
theory and practice, Amsterdam: Elsevier, chapterTaxingtheurbanunrecorded
economy in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Awasthi, R. & Bayraktar, N. (2014), ‘Can tax simplification help lower tax corrup-
tion?’, Policy Research Working Paper Nber 6988 .
40

Bala´n, P., Bergeron, A., Tourek, G. & Weigel, J. L. (forthcoming), ‘Local elites as
state capacity: How city chiefs use local information to increase tax compliance
in the D.R. Congo’, American Economic Review .
Banerjee, A., Hanna, R., Kyle, J., Olken, B. & Sumarto, S. (2015), ‘Tangible infor-
mationandcitizenempowermentidentificationcardsandfoodsubsidyprograms
in indonesia’, Working paper .
Bank, W. (2004), Making Services Work for Poor People, World Bank.
Benjamin, N. C. & Mbaye, A. A. (2010), ‘Informality and productivity in West
Africa: a firm level analysis’, Working Paper .
Bergeron, A., Tourek, G. & Weigel, J. L. (2021), ‘The state capacity ceiling on tax
rates: Evidence from randomized tax abatements in the DRC’, Working paper .
Besley, T. & Persson, T. (2013), Handbook of Public Economics, North Holland,
chapter Taxation and Development.
Blimpo, M. & Castan˜eda Dower, P. (2023), ‘State capacity and taxation: A compar-
ative analysis of small-scale firms in Togo, Ghana, and Benin’, Working Paper
.
Brockmeyer, A., Smith, S., Hernandez, M. & Kettle, S. (2019), ‘Casting a wider tax
net: Experimental evidence from Costa Rica’, American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy 11(3), 55–87.
41

Carrillo, P., Pomeranz, D. & Singhal, M. (2017), ‘Dodging the taxman: Firm mis-
reporting and limits to tax enforcement’, American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 9(2), 144–64.
Chetty, Raj, M. M. & Singhal, M. (2014), ‘Increasing tax compliance through social
recognition’, Policy Brief .
Collin,M.,Maro,V.D.,Evans,D.K.&Manang,F.(2021),‘Propertytaxcompliance
in tanzania: Can nudges help?’, Brookings Institution, Global Working Paper
161 .
Gauthier, B. & Reinikka, R. (2006), ‘Shifting tax burdens through exemptions and
evasion: an empirical investigation of Uganda’, Journal of African Economies
15(3), 373–398.
Gordon, R. & Li, W. (2009), ‘Tax structures in developing countries: Many puzzles
and a possible explanation’, Journal of Public Economics 93(7), 855–866.
Jibao, S., Prichard, W. & van den Boogaard, V. (2017), ‘Informal taxation in post-
conflict Sierra Leone: Taxpayers’ experiences and perceptions’, International
Center for Tax and Development Working Paper 66 .
Joshi, A. & Ayee, J. (2008), Taxation and State Building in Developing Countries:
Capacity and Consent, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, chapter Asso-
ciational Taxation: A Pathway into the Informal Sector?
42

Khan, A., Khwaja, A. & Olken, B. (2016), ‘Tax farming redux: Experimental evi-
dence on performance pay for tax collectors’, Quarterly Journal of Economics
131(1).
Kosack, S. & Fung, A. (2014), ‘Does transparency improve governance?’, Annual
Review of Political Science 17(1), 65–87.
La Porta, R. & Shleifer, A. (2014), ‘Informality and development’, Journal of Eco-
nomic Perspectives .
LaPorta,R.&Shleifer,A.(2016),African Successes,Vol.Volume1,NationalBureau
of Economic Research, chapter The Unofficial Economy in Africa.
Mascagni, G. (2016), ‘From the lab to the field: a review of tax experiments’, ICTD
Working Paper 46 .
Mascagni, G., Nell, C. & Monkam, N. (2017), ‘One size does not fit all: A field
experiment on the drivers of tax compliance and delivery methods in Rwanda’,
ICTD Working Paper (57).
Mascagni, G., Santoro, F. & Mukama, D. (2024), ‘Teach to comply? evidence from a
taxpayer education program in rwanda’, International Tax and Public Finance
32(1), 120–162.
Okunogbe, O. & Pouliquen, V. (2018), ‘Technology, taxation and corruption: Evi-
dencefromtheintroductionofelectronictaxfiling’,World Bank Policy Research
Working paper .
43

Pomeranz, D. (2015), ‘No taxation without information: Deterrence and self-
enforcement in the value added tax’, American Economic Review 105(8), 2539–
2569.
Reinikka, R. & Svensson, J. (2004), ‘Local capture: Evidence from a central gov-
ernment transfer program in Uganda?’, Quarterly Journal of Economics vol.
119(2), 679–706.
Sa´nchez de la Sierra, R. (2020), ‘On the origins of the state: Stationary bandits and
taxation in Eastern Congo’, Journal of Political Economy 128(1), 32–74.
Shimeles, A., Gurara, D. Z. & Woldeyes, F. (2017), ‘Taxman’s dilemma: Coercion or
persuasion? evidence from a randomized field experiment in Ethiopia’, Ameri-
can Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 107(5), 420–424.
Slemrod, J., Blumenthal, M. & Christian, C. (2001), ‘Taxpayer response to an in-
creased probability of audit: Evidence from a controlled experiment in Min-
nesota’, Journal of Public Economics .
Timmons, J. F. & Garfias, F. (2015), ‘Revealed corruption, taxation, and fiscal ac-
countability: Evidence from Brazil’, World Development 70(Supplement C), 13
– 27.
Weigel, J. L. (2020), ‘The participation dividend of taxation: How citizens in Congo
engage more with the state when it tries to tax them’, The Quarterly Journal
of Economics pp. 1–55.
44

Figure 1: Content of the intervention on tax obligations
45

II. Message aux entreprises sur l’usage des recettes fiscales
1. Gestion des recettes municipales par la Mairie de Lomé
Les recettes municipales de la Mairie de Lomé contribuent à la provision de toute une panoplie de services de
la Mairie aux habitants de la ville de Lomé. Parmi ces services, l’on peut citer :
i) l’éclairage public,
ii) le ramassage et la gestion des ordures ménagères,
iii) le balayage des voies publiques,
iv) le maintien de la propreté de la ville,
v) l’assistance aux personnes nécessiteuses telles que les orphelins et les malades,
vi) l’entretien, la surveillance et l’exploitation des cimetières,
vii) l’inhumation des morts délaissés à la morgue du CHU Sylvanus Olympio de Tokoin.
viii) Etc.
En 2014, les dépenses faites par la Mairie pour faire face aux services susmentionnés sont :
• Éclairage public, feux tricolores 1.007.405.865 F
5
46
Figure 2: Content of the intervention on the public use of tax revenues

Figure 3: The timeline of the study
47

Figure 4: Map of selected enumeration areas
48

Figure 5: Firm owners’ perception of the determinant of tax liability
49

elitrauQ
reppU
eht
ni
euneveR
enildnE
htiw
smriF
fo
erahS
4.
3.
2.
1.
0
Control Group Treatment Group
Doesn't Pay Taxes Does Pay Taxes
Figure 6: Firm revenue and tax compliance
50