NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MONEY (NOT) TO BURN:
PAYMENTS FOR ECOSYSTEM SERVICES TO REDUCE CROP RESIDUE BURNING
B.Kelsey Jack
Seema Jayachandran
Namrata Kala
Rohini Pande
Working Paper 30690
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30690
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2022
We thank Patrick Beherer, Xavier Gine, Michael Greenstone, Rema Hanna, Chris Knittel,
Michael Kremer, Jeff Pagel, Imran Rasul, Nick Ryan and many seminar audiences for helpful
comments. We also thank Marshall Burke, Ben Moscona and especially KendraWalker for
guidance and support with the remote sensing data; Juliana Ariza Sanchez, Nils Enevoldsen,
Valentina Goetz, Rohit James Joseph, Sahiba Lal, Aditya Madhusudan, and Ayushi Srivastava
for excellent research assistance; and J-PAL South Asia for field support. We thank J-PAL and
CEGA’s Agricultural Technology Adoption Initiative (ATAI), J-PAL South Asia at IFMR’s Cash
Transfers for Child Health Initiative (CATCH), and Jody and John Arnhold for funding. This
RCT was registered in the American Economic Association Registry under number
AEARCTR-0004508. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by B. Kelsey Jack, Seema Jayachandran, Namrata Kala, and Rohini Pande. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Money (Not) to Burn: Payments for Ecosystem Services to Reduce Crop Residue Burning
B.Kelsey Jack, Seema Jayachandran, Namrata Kala, and Rohini Pande
NBER Working Paper No. 30690
November 2022
JEL No. O13,Q01,Q56
ABSTRACT
Particulate matter significantly reduces life expectancy in India. We use a randomized controlled
trial in the Indian state of Punjab to evaluate the effectiveness of conditional cash transfers (also
known as payments for ecosystem services, or PES) in reducing crop residue burning, which is a
major contributor to the region’s poor air quality. Credit constraints and distrust may make
farmers less likely to comply with standard PES contracts, which only pay the participant after
verification of compliance. We randomize paying a portion of the money upfront and
unconditionally. Despite receiving a lower reward for compliance, farmers offered partial upfront
payment are 8-12 percentage points more likely to comply than are farmers offered the standard
contract. Burning measures derived from satellite imagery indicate that PES with upfront
payments significantly reduced burning, while standard PES payments were inframarginal. We
also show that PES with an upfront component is a cost-effective way to improve India’s air
quality.
B. Kelsey Jack Namrata Kala
University of California, Santa Barbara MIT Sloan School of Management
2400 Bren Hall 100 Main Street, E62-517
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-5131 Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER and CEPR
kelseyjack@ucsb.edu and also NBER
kala@mit.edu
Seema Jayachandran
Department of Economics Rohini Pande
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building Yale University
Princeton University Department of Economics
Princeton, NJ 08544 27 Hillhouse Avenue
and NBER New Haven, CT 06520
jayachandran@princeton.edu and CEPR
and also NBER
rohini.pande@yale.edu

1 Introduction
Worldwide, poor air quality is a leading preventable cause of death and morbidity (Fuller
et al., 2022). Air pollution reduces the life expectancy of North India’s roughly half a billion
residents by up to seven years, which represents one of the largest health burdens from
pollution in the world (Lee and Greenstone, 2021). The use of fires to clear agricultural land
in India, as in other low- and middle-income countries, is a major source of this pollution.
Despite a clear economic case for reducing this pollution, as well as efforts to prohibit and
fine those who produce it, agricultural pollution in North India has increased over the last
few decades (Appendix Figure A.1). Arguably, existing policies have failed to account for
incentives of two groups of actors: local officials’ incentives to enforce penalties when the
costs and benefits of polluting activities are in different political jurisdictions, and farmers’
incentives to protect the environment given that the costs of pollution are largely borne by
others.1 In this paper, we ask whether a policy that explicitly considers these incentives can
reduce pollution.
Every winter, farmers in North India burn rice stalk (residue) to clear fields. Smoke
blankets the region and spreads downwind to major population centers such as New Delhi,
affecting the health of millions of people (Cusworth et al., 2018).2 According to the Global
Burden of Disease, crop residue burning caused 66,000 premature deaths in India in 2015
(GlobalBurdenofDiseaseWorkingGroup,2018). Abackoftheenvelopecalculationsuggests
around 8.7 million acres of annual burning across North India.3 Using these estimates and
focusingonthemortalitycostalone, valuedatastatisticallifevalueof$1million, theaverage
annual external damages per acre are $7,600.4 In comparison, paddy production generates
1Dipoppa and Gulzar (2022) provide evidence of this inter-jurisdictional externality, which undermines
state and local actors’ incentives to enforce fines and bans. Farmers’ political clout and equity concerns
around penalizing small farmers undermine enforcement even further.
2Beyond India, pollution from crop residue burning contributes to the pollution burden in China (Chen
et al., 2017), Southeast Asia (Oanh et al., 2018), and Africa (Cassou, 2018).
3Our estimate is based on paddy burning estimates from Liu et al. (2020), who estimate a burn rate of
50% for all paddy acreage in Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh.
4Climate change, labor productivity, and morbidity costs aren’t included. Murali et al. (2010) estimates
that residue burning in India emits around 4 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalents each year, or
one percent of annual global greenhouse gas emissions (NASA, 2017; Jain et al., 2014; Sarkar et al., 2018;
Shindell et al., 2012).
1

about $500 per acre in revenue; profits are, of course, even lower.5 For consumer welfare to
outweigh the mortality costs of burning, average willingness-to-pay for rice would have to
exceed 15 times the market price. This implies that eliminating the practice would almost
certainly increase societal welfare.
Since 2015, farmers in North India face bans on burning residue, and the government
subsidizes machines to remove and manage it. These policies, however, have been ineffec-
tive. In this paper, we investigate the feasibility of Payments for Ecosystem Services (PES)
contracts, which pay farmers for not burning crop residue. PES programs raise the private
cost of environmental degradation by conditioning cash transfers on avoiding an environ-
mentally harmful behavior. By using a carrot rather than a stick, PES avoids the political
challenges of fines. By placing the incentive on the desired outcome rather than the input,
PES is a more flexible approach than equipment (input) subsidies.
However, contextual and institutional factors may limit the efficacy of PES — and, more
broadly, conditional cash transfers — in low- and middle-income countries. PES participants
must undertake a costly action to comply with the program and receive payment. Farmers
may not comply if they do not trust that the conditional payment will be made, or if they
lack the cash on hand to pay for alternatives to burning before receiving the PES payment,
limiting PES efficacy.
PES contracts that offer partial payment in advance may help with trust and liquidity.
An upfront payment can send a costly signal, increasing trust that the subsequent condi-
tional payment will occur. It can also alleviate liquidity constraints when farmers need to
spend money on alternatives to burning. However, recouping the upfront payment if the
participant fails to comply is frequently infeasible or undesirable in low-income settings.
Practically, upfront payments must then be unconditional, potentially undermining their
usefulness for at least two reasons. First, for a given total payment, offering some of it
upfront and unconditionally lowers farmers’ marginal incentive to comply because the con-
ditional payment is smaller. Second, given a certain level of effectiveness, upfront payments
5District-level data from ICRISAT show that in 2017, rice yields in Punjab were on average 17 quintals
per acre, with a maximum yield of 20.4 quintals per acre (Rao et al., 2012). At a minimum support price of
|2,000 per acre (Sharma, 2022), this implies a revenue of |35,000-41,000 per acre ($440 to 518). Farmers in
our sample in Punjab even reported lower profits, about $300 per acre.
2

reduce cost-effectiveness due to payments to non-compliant farmers. Hence, the net effect of
upfront and unconditional payments on compliance and cost-effectiveness is ambiguous.
Motivated by these observations, we conducted a randomized controlled trial in 171
Punjabi villages during the 2019 rice growing season to compare the efficacy of standard
PES and partial upfront PES. We compare three farmer groups: those who did not receive
a contract (control), those who received a contract with payment conditional on verification
thatthefarmerdidnotburn(standardPES),andthosewhoreceivedacontractwithapartial
upfront payment that was (explicitly) unconditional on compliance, with the remainder
conditionally paid after verification (upfront PES).6
Contract take-up was comparable and relatively high across treatment arms (72%). Our
main finding is that, despite lower conditional payments, upfront PES led to 10 percentage
points higher contract compliance than standard PES; this represents a doubling of the
compliance rate. Remote sensing estimates of burning are consistent with the contract
compliance results, showing a roughly 10 percentage point lower rate of burning among
farmers offered upfront PES versus standard PES. The remote sensing measure also reveals
that standard PES had no effect on burning when compared to the control group. This
indicates that standard PES payments were inframarginal, i.e., paid to farmers who would
not have burned even without PES. The upfront PES effect size corresponds to a 50-80%
higher rate of not-burning than in the standard PES arm or control group. Consistent with
the remote sensing results, in our endline survey, farmers in the upfront treatment arm were
9.5 percentage points more likely than those in the control group to report using balers
(equipment used to bundle residue that has been removed from the field), while farmers in
the standard PES treatment arm reported no increase in the use of balers or other “crop
residue management” equipment.
Why did partial upfront contracts outperform standard PES contracts? An analysis of
heterogeneous treatment effects using (pre-specified) baseline measures of generalized liq-
uidity constraints and distrust is uninformative. Recognizing that generalized measures are
imperfect proxies for specific PES-related beliefs and constraints, we also examine farmer
6Our design has subtreatments that vary specifics of the standard or upfront PES contract, but our
primary empirical specification pools across subtreatments, as described in our pre-analysis plan.
3

responses to endline survey questions about the role of cash constraints and trust in deter-
mining their PES program response. Farmers assigned to the upfront PES treatment have
6.8% higher trust that contract payments will be made than those assigned to standard
PES.7 Around 70% of farmers say cash on hand affected their crop residue management
(CRM) decisions, suggesting that this was an important overall constraint, but responses
did not differ by treatment.
To compare PES costs to the benefits of reduced residue burning, we first calculate the
cost per additional acre not burned for the two treatments using our remote sensing based
outcome. Standard PES has no statistically significant impact on burning, and reflecting
this we observe noisily estimated positive costs that are sensitive to measurement choices.
Upfront PES, on the other hand, reduced burning and the cost per additional acre not
burned under this arm ranges from |2,700 to 4,050 (or $34 to 50). Despite the fact that
a substantial portion of the farmers paid upfront burned anyway, and that some compliers
were inframarginal, the estimated cost of the program is drastically lower than our rough
per-acre mortality benefit estimates ($7,600). Alternatively, we can compare the cost of
pollution abatement in the agriculture sector, using PES for crop residue burning, with
other abatement opportunities, specifically pollution from India’s coal-fired power plants.
Again, the difference is striking: the cost per life saved from installing scrubbers in coal-fired
power plants is roughly $400,000 (Cropper et al., 2019) versus $4,800 to 7,200 for upfront
PES.
The paper is related to several literatures. First, multiple papers highlight the impor-
tance of contract design for agricultural outcomes, such as microfinance and crop insurance
(Carter et al., 2017). Salient design features include timing of when the insurance or loan
contract is offered (Burke et al., 2019; Fink et al., 2020; Casaburi and Willis, 2018), and how
different contract features are bundled (Gin´e and Yang, 2009). We highlight the importance
of contract design in environmental programs.
Second, conditional cash transfers are widely used to incentivize specific outcomes, and
recent research tests the importance of conditionality for take up and outcomes (Baird et al.,
7IfPEScontractswereimplementedaspolicy,repeatedimplementationmighteventuallyaddressdistrust
in payments, making standard PES more cost effective over time.
4

2011; Akresh et al., 2013; Attanasio et al., 2015; Aker and Jack, 2021). In contrast to
previous research that has focused on payment conditionality, we focus on payment timing
and demonstrate that partial upfront payment during enrollment can improve compliance
with a conditional contract.8
Third, while PES is widely used and studied, causal estimates of its impact, particu-
larly comparisons of alternative PES program designs, are scarce. Exceptions include Jay-
achandran et al. (2017), who find that a PES program successfully reduced deforestation
in Uganda, and Jack (2013) and Oliva et al. (2020), who show that program design affects
cost effectiveness of afforestation contracts. While PES programs have been used to address
environmental externalities associated with land use, such as deforestation, they have rarely
been applied to agricultural burning, a major source of both local and global pollution.
Important exceptions include Edwards et al. (2020), who find no impact of a bundled in-
tervention of community-level training including payments to village governments for forest
fire prevention, and Kramer and Ceballos (2018) who find that conditioning agricultural
insurance payouts on not-burning in India lowers burning, but also insurance coverage. We
contributethefirstevaluationoftheimpactofalternativePEScontractstructuresonefficacy
and cost-effectiveness in crop residue burning.
Finally, a growing literature investigates the causes and consequences of crop residue
burning (Behrer, 2019; Garg et al., 2021; Pullabhotla, 2018; Graff Zivin et al., 2020; Rangel
and Vogl, 2019; Dipoppa and Gulzar, 2022). A smaller number of papers test burning-
reduction policies include Edwards et al. (2020) and Kramer and Ceballos (2018); both
vary incentives for burning in the context of bundled interventions. Our focus, instead, is
on contract design. We leverage novel data from a new remote sensing model to measure
crop residue burning (see Walker et al. (2022) for further detail), which is better suited to
detecting plot-level changes in burning than existing measures of active fires, burn scars or
smoke (Balboni et al., 2021; Behrer, 2019; Edwards et al., 2020; Rangel and Vogl, 2019;
Jayachandran, 2009).9
8Evidence from other settings supports the notion that the timing of transfers can affect program out-
comes, because of liquidity (Coffman et al., 2019) or other channels.
9Existing remote sensing measures of fires have historically relied on high frequency but low spatial
resolution sensors, such as MODIS, (e.g., Vadrevu et al. (2011); Liu et al. (2019)). Newer sensors offer
higher spatial resolution but less frequent observation, which potentially miss some crop residue fires due to
5

2 Background and Study Design
2.1 Crop residue burning and policy responses
About80%oftheplantedareaofPunjab,India’sgranary,iscultivatedusinganannualpaddy
rice-wheat dual crop system. Rice is farmed from June to October (Kharif) and wheat from
November to April (Rabi). The introduction of mechanized harvesting in the 1980s resulted
in widespread adoption of the dual crop system, but it also created a need to manage waste
on the field: mechanized rice harvesting leaves 8 to 12-inches of stalk, representing over 2.5
tonsofresidueperacreofpaddyrice(Jainetal.,2014). Ina2019listingsurveywithfarming
cooperative members in our two study districts, all farmers reported using a combination of
mechanized harvesting techniques that necessitate residue removal.
Controlled burning has gradually emerged as the primary method used by Punjabi farm-
ers to manage crop residue. Appendix Figure A.1 shows a rising incidence of fires across
Punjab as a whole, as well as in our two study districts of Bathinda and Faridkot, using
satellite imagery spanning 2000-2018 (Distributed Active Archive Center, 2018).Burning re-
mains high, despite reasonable levels of knowledge of CRM; in our baseline survey, nearly
60% of farmers reported awareness of and use of CRM alternatives to burning. While cost is
the primary reason for farmers’ preference for burning, they also reported that renting CRM
equipment from a cooperative or custom hiring center would take around a week during peak
season, potentially delaying Rabi sowing. Furthermore, the majority of farmers who were
familiar with CRM alternatives expressed concern about the perceived negative effects on
agricultural productivity.10
Recognizing the negative pollution externalities from residue burning, the Indian Penal
Code makes residue burning a punishable offense (Section 188). A 2015 court judgement
banned residue burning and directed North Indian state governments to fine farmers who
did so, with fines ranging from |2,500 to |15,000 depending on the farmers’ landholdings
their short visual signature (e.g., Badarinath et al. (2006); Singh et al. (2021)). Planet Labs high-resolution
temporalandspatialimageryhelpsusovercomethistradeoff. SeeWalkeretal.(2022)foradditionaldetails.
10AgronomicevidencesuggeststhatCRMmayindeedlowerproductivityintheshortrunbyimmobilizing
available nitrogen in the soil. In the long run, however, incorporating residue into the soil may increase
organic content and available nutrients, improving productivity (Sarkar et al., 2018).
6

(Bhuvaneshwari et al., 2019; National Green Tribunal, 2015).11 Penalty-based policies have
had limited impact due to agricultural lobby opposition and insufficient enforcement. A
second set of policies subsidizes in-situ CRM alternatives (in-situ techniques either pull up
and mulch the stalk or leave it standing). In 2017, the central government announced a
two-year $144.3 million program for Punjab, Haryana, and Uttar Pradesh. The funding
subsidized equipment such as a new seeding machine known as the Happy Seeder, which
sows directly through the paddy residue, and the Super Straw Management System, which
chops residue. The subsidy did not cover ex-situ equipment that removes the residue from
the field, such as using equipment (or labor) to pull up and gather the straw, then using
another piece of equipment (a baler) to bundle it into bales.12
Even with the subsidy scheme in place, the cost of CRM equipment rental remains
high for farmers. Farmers typically rent the equipment from hiring centers or agricultural
cooperatives, which qualify for an 80% discount on equipment purchases.13 According to
our baseline survey data, the median rental cost for a Happy Seeder was |1,250 per acre,
with total out of pocket costs of CRM alternatives to burning, including equipment rental, of
about |3,000 per acre. Farmers may prefer ex-situ methods because they are cheaper (e.g.,
renting a baler is around |1,000 per acre, even without a subsidy in place) or because they
are perceived as less damaging to yields than in-situ methods.
To summarize, the policies that have been implemented to address residue burning have
been largely ineffective to date. This motivates our focus on a more flexible alternative that
aligns incentives: subsidizing not-burning through payments for ecosystem services (PES).
We now describe our research design.
2.2 PES contracts
WeexperimentallycomparetheeffectivenessofalternativePEScontractdesignsforreducing
cropresidueburningtoastatusquo(ofunenforcedfinesandinsufficientequipmentsubsidies)
control group. The treatment arms are summarized in Figure 1.
11The National Green Tribunal ruling applied to Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, and Punjab.
12Baled straw is often used as an industrial heat source, displacing fossil fuel combustion.
13Individuals can purchase equipment at a 50% subsidy, after which a Happy Seeder cost about |40,000
($570), but few small- and medium-sized farmers own them.
7

Our first treatment arm implements a standard PES contract, with payments contingent
onnotburningandpaidaftercomplianceisverified. (Wediscusshowcontractsaremonitored
and enforced later in this section.) Based on discussions with the Punjab government, our
base contract sets payment at |800 per acre. To change behavior, the payment needs to
cover the marginal cost of CRM relative to burning, not the full cost of CRM. Burning may
take time or require some material inputs, and some farmers may perceive it as detrimental
to soil fertility. The variability in whether farmers burned in the status quo (8-20% did
not burn in our control group, according to our two remote sensing estimates) indicates
heterogeneity in farmers’ reservation price to switch away from burning; some farmers have
a negative (or 0) reservation price, but the vast majority have a positive reservation price,
which likely varies considerably. To assess the importance of payment levels, we introduce
a variant on the standard PES contract that pays twice as much as the base contract, or
|1600 per acre not burned.14
ThestandardPEScontractpaysoutonlyafterthedesiredbehaviororactionhasoccurred
(i.e., not burning). Farmers may not undertake a costly action in anticipation of a future
payment if they do not trust the principal to follow through with the payment or if they lack
cash on hand to carry out the action required for compliance. Both distrust and liquidity
constraints are plausible barriers to compliance in our study setting. At baseline, only 13%
of farmers said they had complete trust in the government, with even lower levels of trust in
NGOs, about 7%. Less than half of the sample had |5,000 in savings and the majority said
that it would be somewhat difficult or difficult to access a |5,000 loan. Our second treatment
arm was designed to address these constraints by offering partial payment upfront, with the
remainder paid conditional on contract outcomes. The sum of the (potential) upfront and ex
post payments was held fixed at |800 to match our base contract. We evaluate two variants
of the upfront PES treatment, which vary the share paid upfront.
While upfront payments could, in principle, be recouped from a participant who does not
14In November 2019, (after our intervention) the federal court ordered the Punjab government to pay
farmers |100 per quintal of paddy, or about |2,500 per acre, conditional on self-reported not burning.
Concerns regarding farmer’s self-declarations that they did not burn led to the program’s suspension a few
weeks later. In our endline survey, about 30% of the sample were aware of the government program, of
which about half reported applying to the program. The other half reported learning about the program
after having begun residue management. 80% of farmers who were aware of the program did not anticipate
timely PES payments.
8

comply, imposing such conditionality is challenging in practice (e.g., because participants are
poor). Ourcontractexplicitlymadetheupfrontpaymentunconditional. Becausetheupfront
component reduces the conditional payment amount — the farmer’s incentive to comply —
this feature could reduce compliance. In addition, because unconditional payments will be
made to some farmers who then do not comply, the upfront payment could reduce PES
cost-effectiveness, even if it increases compliance.
Farmers’ participation in all treatments was voluntary, and noncompliance with the PES
contract was only penalized through non-payment. This raises two more concerns. First,
some people whocomplied with thecontract might haveundertaken the desired activity even
in the absence of the contract, i.e., the payments are inframarginal to their non-burning.
Second, because there is no penalty for non-compliance, many farmers may enroll and later
renege, increasing implementation costs particularly when some payment is offered upfront
(Oliva et al., 2020). Our study design allows us to evaluate these concerns by measuring
“additionality” (i.e., whether contracts reduce burning relative to status quo) as well as
evaluating the cost effectiveness of alternative PES contracts.
2.3 Sample
We chose Bathinda and Faridkot as our two study districts in Punjab because both have high
rates of burning and little activity to encourage CRM adoption by other organizations.15 We
limitoursampleframewithinthesedistrictstovillageswithfunctioningfarmercooperatives,
and within these villages, to farmers who were cooperative members (as of August 2019).
From among the393villagesinour sampling frame, wechosethe300with the mostmembers
for screening.
Initial farmer eligibility screening was done by phone. A farmer was eligible if he or she
grew between 2 and 12 acres of paddy, planned to harvest after the second week in Octo-
ber and plant the winter (Rabi) crop, and employed farm equipment indicative of burning
(namely, used a reaper or did not use a chopper) in the previous year. The last criterion
15According to the Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) satellite data (Distributed Active
Archive Center, 2018), Faridkot had about 1.9 fires per square km in 2018, ranking sixth highest in the
state, while Bathinda had 1.7 fires per sq km, ranking ninth. We present total fires from this data source in
Appendix Figure A.1.
9

means that our sample has higher burning than average; by minimizing inframarginal pay-
ments through sample design, we increased statistical power to detect changes. We chose
176 villages with at least 18 eligible households for an in-person baseline survey.16 Villages
with fewer than six completed baseline surveys were eliminated, resulting in a final sample
of 171 villages and 1668 respondents.
In February 2020, we conducted a census in four study villages to assess sample repre-
sentativeness. 70% of farmers reported being cooperative members. Census farmers, like
study farmers, were nearly universally engaged in paddy-wheat cultivation. Since we only
enrolled farmers cultivating 12 acres or less (a criterion that 80% of census farmers met),
study farmers cultivated less land than census farmers (5.3 acres versus 7.7 acres). The fact
that our sample was screened to include farmers who were more likely to burn may explain
why study farmers were 29 percentage points less likely to report knowledge of alternatives
to burning.
2.4 Randomization and contract implementation
We randomly assigned villages to one of four treatments or the control group. Figure 1
summarizes the sample size per arm. Randomization occurred while the listing and baseline
surveys were ongoing.17 Following a baseline survey, eligible farmers in treatment villages
received a follow-up visit and were offered a PES contract, on average 5.6 days later. If they
could not be located or did not have a bank account, they were not offered the contract.18
Farmers received a basic program description as part of the contract offer (see Appendix
C).Thecontract(offeredbyJ-PAL)correspondingtotheirtreatmentarmwasthenshownto
interested farmers, and the terms were read aloud by the enumerator.19 Farmers who agreed
16The baseline prioritized villages with the largest number of eligible households based on listing data.
Baseline data collection stopped once the target sample of 176 villages was reached. Enumerators moved
down a randomly ordered eligible list until 16 surveys were completed or the list was exhausted.
17Initial assignment was stratified on district, below versus above median number of eligible households
basedonphonelistingsurvey, baselinesurveycompletioninthevillage, andlistingsurveycompletioninthe
village. Weincludeafifthstrataof15villagesthatwererandomlyaddedtothedifferentarmstosupplement
the sample size. These were villages where listing survey had been covered between six to 17 households.
The order of listing was randomized, and the baseline and treatment implementation followed this order.
Baseline surveyors didn’t know a village’s treatment status.
18Contract payments were electronic, with account information only collected from treatment farmers.
19A sample contract for the |800/acre arm with no upfront payments is included in Appendix D.
10

to the contract terms received an information handout outlining the terms and conditions,
as well as procedures for monitoring and verifying burning outcomes. During the enrollment
visit, enumeratorsrecordedwhetherthefarmerwasofferedthePEScontractinpersonand, if
not, why(e.g., householdcouldnotbefound, nobankaccount), andwhetherthefarmertook
up the contract. A farmer’s entire paddy acreage (as physically measured by the surveyors
at baseline) was automatically enrolled if the farmer took up the contract. The maximum
amount a farmer could be paid under the contract was |16,000 for farmers in the |1600 per
acre arm and |8,000 in the other treatment arms.20 Farmers in the upfront PES arm received
the upfront portion of their payment via direct bank deposit 2-3 days after enrollment.
Contract monitoring and enforcement required verifying that none of the paddy plots
were burned. To detect burning or its absence, project enumerators had to visit the plot
duringtheshortwindowbetweenwhenthefarmerremovedtheresidue(viaCRMorburning)
and when the farmer tilled the soil for planting the winter (Rabi) crop.21 Because monitoring
was required during this farmer-specific window of a few days, the farmer was responsible
for contacting J-PAL after managing residue and at least four days before sowing the winter
(Rabi) crop. Up to two monitoring visits could be requested if, for example, different plots
had different sowing schedules. When farmers called in, appointments for monitoring were
made, and the map of all study plots collected at baseline was given to the monitor.22
Visual inspection at the right moment can tell if a field was burned. The enumerator
was required by the monitoring protocol to observe and record multiple observations on each
plot, including burned straw or residue, grey or black ash on the soil, burned root residue,
burned grass or weeds on the plot boundaries, and burned leaves or tree branches on the plot
boundaries. Enumerators were told to inspect the plot perimeter and walk onto each plot
and inspect the soil. Farmers were not immediately informed of the monitoring results after
it was completed. Monitoring staff did not know specifically how the different data they
20Farmerseligibleforthestudycultivated12orfeweracresofpaddy. Forfarmerswithmorethan10acres
of paddy, about 7% of the sample, the value of the contract per acre is constrained by the cap.
21Prior to the completion of CRM, a monitoring visit could not rule out future burning. After tilling,
visual signs of burning become less obvious.
22Placing the onus for monitoring on the farmer may lower compliance. However, it increases monitoring
accuracysincetheprecisetimingforverifyingabsenceofburningvariesfrommid-OctobertolateNovember.
FarmerswhohadnotyetrequestedmonitoringwerecontactedinthethirdweekofOctoberwithareminder
that it was the farmer’s responsibility to request monitoring.
11

recorded would be aggregated to determine contract compliance. The observations were
combined into a single farmer-level compliance metric, and payments were made on a rolling
basis, approximately 2-3 days after monitoring. Any burning was a contract violation.
3 Data
Figure 2 presents the agricultural season for the paddy-wheat cropping cycle in Punjab, as
well as the data collection timeline. Our data collection is focused on measuring impacts on
farmer behavior. Because only a small proportion of farmers in each village participated in
our study (on average, 9.8 farmers per village), we do not seek to detect treatment effects
on village-level outcomes (such as air quality).
3.1 Survey and contract compliance data
Baseline survey We conducted baseline surveys with the identified person on the coop-
erative member list in October 2019. This person was in charge of household agricultural
decisions in more than 90% of households. We collected data on demographics, agricultural
production, income and credit constraints, trust in organizations, and barriers to CRM.
Farmers listed all plots where paddy was grown, and accompanied the enumerator to each
plot to collect geocoded perimeter measurements. The latter form the basis for monitoring
treatment farmers’ contract compliance and for linking satellite imagery to farmers for both
the treatment and control groups.23
Endline survey We conducted a phone-based endline survey in June 2020, following the
completion of the winter (Rabi) harvest.24 The survey gathered information about self-
reported field burning and CRM techniques. We also gathered information on agricultural
production and income over the previous two seasons (Kharif 2019 and Rabi 2020). Section
23At each plot, the enumerator walked the perimeter of the field using a mapping application on a GPS-
enabled tablet. We drop 47 fields (1.6 percent) where either the field ID was missing from the geospatial
data or two fields completely overlapped. Because the plot was measured before treatment was assigned,
any measurement error in plot inventories or field perimeters should be orthogonal to treatment.
24The contract rollout and monitoring were completed prior to COVID-19 pandemic. However, the in-
person endline survey, scheduled for April 2020, had to be switched to a phone-based survey.
12

4.1 reports attrition between the baseline and endline surveys and balance tests.
Contract take-up and monitoring data At the time of contract offer, we record farmer
enrollment decisions and non-enrollment reasons. We also note whether a treated farmer re-
quested monitoring. We observe monitoring results for those who did, including the distinct
plot-level signs of burning described above. These were combined to produce a binary burn-
ing outcome: A farmer complied with the contract if none of his or her plots show signs of
burning. A total of 187 farmers and 319 plots were observed.
Spot check data We conducted spot checks on one randomly selected field for 50% of
farmers in each sample village. The spot check data are used as training inputs to the remote
sensing model described below. The spot check protocol was similar to that for monitoring
withafewexceptions. First, onlyonerandomlyselectedplotwasvisitedperfarmer. Second,
because the farmer did not accompany the enumerator, all observation occurred outside of
the field. Third, unlike the monitoring visits that occurred when the farmer informed us they
had removed their residue but not yet tilled the soil for their winter (Rabi) crop, spot checks
could not be synchronized with the farmer’s specific harvest and CRM timing.25 Overall, we
conducted 720 spot checks in November 2019.
3.2 Remote sensing measures
Satellite data The data on take-up and monitoring are informative of how many farmers
signedupforthecontractandwereverifiedasnotburning, butnottherateofburningamong
non-monitored farmers. Some farmers in the control group may not have burned, and some
farmers in the treatment group who did not enroll or did not call for monitoring may also
not have burned. Thus, our analysis also uses a measure of burning constructed from high-
resolution satellite imagery from two sources, PlanetScope and Sentinel-2.26 PlanetScope
25We do not use spot check data as a primary outcome because to have sufficient statistical power, we
would have had to conduct repeated visits to address the challenge of observing the field after harvest but
before tilling. Repeated monitoring might have also directly affected behavior.
26PlanetScope has a 3 meter resolution and Sentinel 20 meter. Other commonly used sensors such as
MODIS and VIIRS are available at lower resolution only, 375 meters to 1 kilometer, and therefore inappro-
priate for the small fields we study.
13

data is higher frequency (roughly every 2-3 days) and is less likely to miss a burning event.
This feature is important because burned fields become observationally similar to unburned
fields once the soil is tilled for Rabi planting. Appendix Figure A.2 depicts this in Sentinel-
2 imagery for one study field. The absence of a persistent visual signature of burning is
particularly problematic in PlanetScope’s visual and near-infrared bands. Sentinel-2 data
are collected at a lower frequency (every week to 10 days) but, unlike PlanetScope, they
provide information in the mid-infrared range, which helps separate burned from unburned
fields. Thus, the imagery from the two sensors complements one another.
Data processing and classification We train a random forest (RF) model with labels
(burn or no burn) from the monitoring and spot check data, using pixel-level data from
the two sensors; Walker et al. (2022) describes the data processing and machine learning
model). Our labeled set (of 681 fields) includes burn labels (positives) from the spot check
andmonitoringdataandno-burnlabels(negatives)onlyfromthemonitoringdata.27 TheRF
model outputs a pixel-level continuous prediction score ranging from 0 to 1, which represents
the proportion of decision trees that the model classified as burned. We avoid over-fitting by
holdingouteachfield(consistingofmanypixels)fromthetrainingset, obtainingaprediction
for each held-out pixel. To aggregate pixel-level data to a field-level burning outcome, we
averagethepredictedscoreacrosspixelsinafield(omittingperimeterpixels)andthenchoose
a threshold above which a field is classified as burned. To generate binary burn estimates for
the entire data set, we apply the mean of the trained RF models (recall we have one trained
model for each of the fields in the training set, given the procedure to avoid over-fitting) to
unlabeled pixels, aggregate and apply the classification thresholds as described in the next
paragraph. Forconsistencywithothercontractoutcomes(ahighervalueisanenvironmental
improvement), we invert the burning classification when estimating treatment effects. At
the farmer level, this outcome equals zero if a farmer is predicted to have burned any of his
fields.
We present two alternative thresholds: (1) equalize prediction accuracy for burn and no-
burn labels (training data), which also equalizes type I and type II errors or sensitivity and
27We exclude negative labels collected during spot checks because they indicate no burning in the days
immediately preceding the spot check visit but provide no information about burning outside that window.
14

specificity (balanced accuracy), and (2) maximize overall model accuracy (max accuracy).
Because burning is more common in our data than not burning , the max accuracy measure
improves overall accuracy at the expense of accuracy in predicting no-burns, i.e., by relaxing
the threshold to classify more fields as burned. This, however, also increases the likelihood
of false negatives (burns). The balanced accuracy measure avoids this problem by balancing
the rate of false positives and false negatives, but at some (relatively minor) cost to overall
accuracy(byincreasingthescopeforfalsepositivesbyclassifyingfewerfieldsasburned). The
tradeoff between these two measures affects the control group mean burning rate: predicted
burning is higher in the max accuracy measure than the balanced accuracy measure by
construction. These differences only change treatment effects if the fields in the part of the
distribution between the two thresholds are disproportionately from the treatment or control
groups.28
The RF model is trained using negative labels that are only available for the treatment
group (and positive labels for both treatment and control groups). This could introduce
bias into the classification if the spectral signature of not-burning is affected by treatment;
if not-burning looks the same in treatment and control, this is not an issue. As one check
on potential bias, Appendix Figure A.3 shows the distributions of the continuous random
forest model output using fields not in the training set. Both for fields classified as burn
and those classified as no-burn, the distributions are similar in the treatment and control
groups. Formal statistical tests for equal distributions, conditional on classified burning
status, confirm that there is no statistical difference.
The balanced accuracy model has an overall accuracy of 78 percent (see Table A.1), while
the max accuracy model does marginally better (by definition) at 82 percent. The difference
is due to 425 fields or 203 farmers (12% of the sample) being classified as no-burn under
the balanced accuracy threshold and burn under the max accuracy threshold. 11% of the
control group, 10% of the standard PES treatment and 15% of the upfront PES treatment
fall between the thresholds, i.e., moving from balanced accuracy to max accuracy re-assigns
their no-burn outcome from 1 to 0.
28Given that the farmer-level outcome is set to one if a farmer burns any of his fields, impacts on farmer-
level burning outcomes may be more pronounced than at the field level.
15

3.3 Burning and farmer heterogeneity measures
Burning measures We use multiple data sources to measure farmer residue burning, and
consider ancillary outcomes that are likely related to burning. To begin, we use contract
compliance data to create an indicator for whether a farmer requested monitoring and, if so,
whether the farmer was found not to have burned during the monitoring visit. This outcome
allows us to compare the treatment effects of standard PES versus upfront PES. However,
because we do not measure this outcome in the control group, we cannot use it to compare
impacts to counterfactual burning.
Second, we use remote sensing measures that construct a predicted not-burning measure
for all farmers. We present two versions of the remote sensing model, as described in the
previous sub-section, which rely on the same underlying imagery and machine learning mod-
els, but differ in the threshold used to convert the continuous score at the pixel level into a
field-level binary burn/no-burn outcome.
Finally, we rely on endline survey data for measures of CRM practices among treatment
and control farmers, which include the primary alternatives to burning: balers (ex-situ) and
Happy Seeders (in-situ).
Farmer heterogeneity measures Following our pre-analysis plan, we use baseline data
to create a distrust index and a financial constraints index, which are the two barriers that
motivated us to test the upfront PES contract. The survey questions used to create all
heterogeneity indices and their aggregation into binary variables are discussed in Appendix
B. Because our study population had no experience with PES programs, and over 40% had
no experience with CRM equipment, the survey questions focused on farmer trust in general
and overall financial constraints related to agriculture. Both baseline indices, thus, capture
generalized beliefs rather than specific beliefs related to choices around residue burning. For
instance, when measuring financial constraints, we asked farmers if they could access savings
or loans for agricultural equipment for two different amounts (|5,000 and |10,000.). Trust
was measured using questions that asked farmers their level of trust in people in general,
and specific groups (the Punjab Government, their village Panchayat, cooperative society,
NGOs, and financial institutions like banks and insurance companies). In contrast, the
16

endline survey directly asked treatment group farmers about trust in the PES program, and
financial constraints specific to CRM.
We also construct indices of CRM equipment access, which may affect overall PES pro-
gram take-up or compliance (we did not hypothesize they would differentially affect compli-
ance with standard versus upfront PES). We construct three sub-indices to measure different
access barriers: informational barriers (i.e., awareness of alternatives to burning and knowl-
edge of where to rent them), CRM equipment access barriers (including delays), as well as
negative beliefs about the impact of CRM equipment on soil health and agricultural yield.
4 Results
4.1 Estimation strategy
We estimate the following equation:
y = α+βStandardPES +γUpfrontPES +ψX +ϵ
ij j j j ij
wherey denotesanoutcomeforfarmeriinvillagej,andStandardPES andUpfrontPES
ij j j
are binary variables that take the value 1 if village j is assigned to the standard PES treat-
ment and the upfront PES treatment, respectively. X are strata fixed effects. Following
j
our pre-analysis plan, and to increase statistical power, we pool treatment variants (different
payment levels in StandardPES and different proportions paid upfront in UpfrontPES ).
j j
Standard errors are clustered at the village level. β is the effect of being assigned to the
standard PES treatment, and γ the effect of assignment to the upfront PES treatment (each
relative to the control group).
Table 1 presents summary statistics and four types of balance tests: for the treatment
(pooling all treatment arms) versus control group, for standard PES (pooling |800 and
|1600 per acre) versus the control group, upfront PES (pooling 25% upfront and 50% up-
front groups) versus the control group, and for upfront PES versus standard PES. In each
comparison self-reported burning in 2018 is balanced. We observe slight imbalance in mea-
sures of land size and CRM indices; the p-value of the joint F-test is 0.48 between treatment
17

and control.
Table 1 also provides more details on our respondents. They have significant farming
experience and produce on about five acres of land, on average. The majority of household
income comes from agriculture, with a control group mean agricultural profit of |114,000
(median is |58,000).29 At baseline, 68 percent of farmers self-reported burning their fields in
the previous year, though the actual value is likely higher given our screening criteria. Less
than half of the sample, 48%, had previously signed a written contract.
We have no attrition for our main outcomes of PES compliance and remotely-sensed
burning. For the endline survey, Appendix Table A.2 shows that a reasonably high response
rateforaphonesurvey(greaterthan80%)butwithsomedifferentialattrition; thetreatment
group was about 5 percentage points less likely to respond. However, there is no difference
in attrition between the standard and upfront groups.30 Following Lee (2009), we report
both the point estimates and upper and lower bounds on our estimates for regressions using
endline survey outcomes for treatment and control groups.31
4.2 Treatment effects
A. Did farmers take up the PES contract offers?
In Table 2, we examine differences across treatment arms in whether the surveyor found and
offered the farmer the PES contract, as well as whether the farmer was eligible for the offer
(i.e., he had a bank account and had not yet harvested his paddy). These outcomes are zero
by construction in the control group, and they are determined for treatment farmers before
they learned the details of the contracts. Farmers were found in treatment arms at a similar
rate – 87.9% in the upfront PES treatments versus 88.5% in the standard PES treatment
29The baseline agricultural profit measure helps interpret the magnitude of the contract payments; the
medianbasecontractpaymentof|800peracreequals|4,000perfarmer(sincetheaveragefarmercultivates
5 acres), or about 7% of median agricultural profit.
308%ofthesamplehadinvalidnumbers,while4.8%couldn’tbecontactedineightattempts. Theremaining
attrition is due to: 1% of the sample didn’t answer the phone, 0.12% had the wrong number, 0.59% refused
to talk prior to the consent, 1.2% didn’t consent to the survey, and 0.96% didn’t complete the survey.
31Lee bounds entail estimating treatment effects after dropping (in turn) the observations with the lowest
and highest outcomes in the less-attrited group, so that the proportion of included observations is equal
across treatment and control. We trim observations from the control group within strata and include strata
fixed effects in the estimation because our randomization is stratified.
18

(column 1). The same is true for eligibility: 83.3% of farmers were eligible in the upfront
PES treatment and 84.4% in the standard PES treatment (column 2).
Nextweconsiderprogramtake-up,whichisagainzerobyconstructionforcontrolfarmers.
Take-up (i.e., whether a farmer signed the PES contract) was high, with around 72% of
farmers in both treatment arms signing the contract.32 Conditional on being found and
being eligible, the probability that a farmer took up the PES program is very high (around
87%). This is consistent with the option value associated with the contract being high in
both treatments (since farmers who choose to burn forgo the conditional payments but face
no penalties). The fact that contract take-up is not higher when the PES contract includes
upfront payment is surprising, but could stem from the fact that farmers were not given the
upfront cash right away. They were asked for their bank account information, and funds
were transferred 2-3 days later. Trust barriers might have similarly deterred take up in the
two treatment arms; farmers may have objected to sharing bank account information or
granting access to their plots for monitoring.
B. Did farmers offered PES contracts reduce their crop residue burning?
Our first measure of not-burning is contract compliance, i.e., whether the farmer called for
monitoring and in the monitoring visit was found in compliance with the contract (no fields
were burned). Table 3, column 1 shows that 8.5% of farmers complied with the contract in
the standard PES group. Compliance in the upfront arm is 10 percentage points higher, at
18%, and equality between the two groups can be rejected with p < 0.01.33 Thus, despite
similarcontracttake-upratesinthestandardandupfrontPEStreatments, upfrontpayments
make farmers twice as likely to comply with the contract.
Next, we consider our two remote-sensing based measures of whether a farmer burned
any fields.34 Columns 2 and 3 of Table 3 present results for the balanced accuracy and max
accuracyclassifications, respectively. Aswithcontractcompliance, upfrontPESoutperforms
32As shown in Appendix Figure A.4, take up rates were similar across all sub-treatments.
33Treatmenteffectsontheoutcomeofwhetherthefarmercalledformonitoring(regardlessofcompliance)
follow a similar pattern – 11% of farmers in standard PES called and there is a 10 percentage points higher
likelihood of calling for monitoring in the upfront arm.
34About 18% of the sample had at least one field predicted to be burned and at least one field predicted
not burned. We present plot-level treatment effects in Table A.3.
19

standard PES, with treatment effects that are similar across the two alternative remote
sensing measures. Relative to the control group, upfront PES increases not-burning by 8-
11.5 percentage points. In contrast, the effects of standard PES relative to the control group
is indistinguishable from zero.35 The latter result implies that standard PES payments were
inframarginal: these farmers would not have burned their fields even if the program did not
exist.
The two remote-sensing models differ in their estimate of the not-burning rate in the
control group, which is 20% in the balanced accuracy classification and 9% in the max
accuracy classification. Appendix Figure A.5 shows the control group mean and estimated
treatment effects as the threshold is varied from a lower bound that classifies all true no-
burns as no-burns to an upper bound that classifies all true burns as burns. The treatment
effects are less sensitive to the choice of threshold than is the control group mean (top panel).
The variability in the estimated control group mean does not affect the conclusion that the
upfront PES arm was effective at lowering burning, but it does bear on whether the results
imply that some farmers left money on the table. With the higher control group mean
estimated in the balanced accuracy model, the implied rate of not-burning in the upfront
villages is 31%, implying that some farmers in the upfront arm who did not burn also did
not call for the conditional payment.36 The max accuracy results, on the other hand, imply
that all farmers who did not burn received the conditional payment, so farmers did not leave
money on the table.
Appendix Figure A.4 disaggregates treatment effects by the four treatment arms. The
point estimates for all outcomes other than contract take-up are larger for upfront PES arms.
Paying more in the standard PES variants (|1,600 versus 800) increased the point estimates
on compliance and remote sensing based measure, though the difference between the two
standard PES variants is indistinguishable from zero. In both cases, compliance with the
|1,600 arm is lower than with either upfront arm. The latter result is striking given that
the upfront contract only pays |800 per acre. Across the two upfront arms (25% upfront
35Treatmenteffectsestimatedonoursubsampleforwhichwehavespotcheckdataaresimilarinmagnitude
(seeAppendixTableA.4), butwithconsiderablylowerstatisticalpoweranda(mechanically)highercontrol
group mean given that not all burns were detected through a one-time surprise field visit.
36Intheendlinesurvey,somefarmersreportedlosingthenumbertocallformonitoringorforgettingwhen
they were supposed to call.
20

versus 50% upfront), it is theoretically ambiguous which should perform better, as increasing
fraction paid upfront meant a lower reward for compliance; we find similar effects for the
two variants.37
In Table 4, we analyze treatment effects on the main ex-situ and in-situ alternatives to
burning: balerandHappySeederuse, respectively. Increaseduseofbalers–by10percentage
points – can explain all of the difference in compliance between the treatment arms.We see
no consistent or detectable measurable changes in the use of the Happy Seeder. Consistent
with the null effect of standard PES on our remotely sensed burning measure, we see no
difference in CRM usage in the standard PES arm relative to the control group, suggesting
that standard PES had no impact on residue management behavior. In the second panel,
we present Lee bounds to account for differential attrition by treatment status in the endline
survey (from which we derive these results). Consistent with the point estimates, we only
see a statistically significant increase in baler use for the upfront PES group (between 8.8
and 14.5 percentage points, the lower and upper bounds, respectively).
Two important factors cited by farmers as arguments in favor of residue burning are
reducing delays between harvesting and sowing the next crop and agricultural yields. In
our setting, the significant upfront payouts in the upfront PES treatment may have directly
affected agricultural outcomes. Appendix Table A.5 present treatment effects on crop yield
for rice and the winter (Rabi) crop (which is wheat for 99.6% of the sample) and on delays
in sowing the winter (Rabi) crop. Neither treatment impacted these outcomes.
4.3 Why did upfront payments increase farmer PES compliance?
Upfront PES reduces burning more than standard PES. We now examine why partial pay-
ment upfront may boost contract effectiveness.
Panel A of Table 5 presents heterogeneous treatment effects by pre-specified baseline
indices: a distrust index and a financial constraints index.38 These indices capture general-
37Theresultsacrossthetwoupfrontarmsdivergemoreforthemaxaccuracyremotesensingbasedoutcome
than for either the compliance or balanced accuracy outcomes, though differences in the coefficients fall well
within the standard errors around all of the estimates.
38We also use a generalized random forest model to identify variables that explain heterogeneity in the
treatment effect of the |1600 Standard PES treatment relative to the control. The four variables that this
procedure determines are the most important one are all elements in our trust index. However, when used
21

ized distrust and financial constraints faced by farmers, rather than CRM or PES-specific
constraints. In both cases, we use a binary measure for being above the index’s median, or
highly constrained. Columns 1 and 2 present results using contract compliance as the out-
come, and Columns 3 through 6 using remote sensing measures of burning as the outcome.
We do not find any differential impact of the upfront program by either heterogeneity index
on any of the outcomes.39
In addition, in the endline survey, we asked a subset of farmers (63% of the sample)
in the standard and upfront arms about distrust and financial constraints related to CRM
decisions and the PES program.40 To gauge trust in the PES program, we asked: “When I
was deciding how to manage my residue during Kharif 2019, I was sure that J-PAL would
return and pay me the amount owed to me if I did not burn.” We create a binary variable
that equals 1 if farmers answered yes (low constraint), and 0 otherwise. To test for cash
constraints in CRM decisions, we asked farmers how much they agreed with the statement
“WhenIwasdecidinghowtomanagemyresidueduringKharif2019, shortageofcashlimited
what methods I could choose for residue management.”41 We create a binary variable that
equals 1 if they answered “Shortage of cash was not at all important”, “not very important”
or “somewhat important” and 0 otherwise.42
Panel B of Table 5 presents results using these two endline variables as outcomes.43
Farmers in the upfront arm are nearly 7 percentage points more likely than farmers in the
standard PES arm to say that they trusted that the conditional payment would be made if
in a second step to test heterogeneity in the treatment effect of the Upfront PES arms relative to the |800
Standard PES treatment, they are inconsistently signed and imprecisely estimated.
39Like all heterogeneity on observables, this null result could mean that the generalized measures are
not relevant or that our baseline measures lack sufficient sample variability to pick up an effect. Other
mechanisms may also be relevant, such as reciprocity. We are guided by our pre-analysis plan, but note
that reciprocity seems unlikely mechanism the high cost of contract compliance and the lack of differential
endline survey participation by treatment arm.
40We ask these questions of only a subset of farmers because we reduced the survey duration partway
through the sample.
41Only contract signers were asked about trust, but both were asked about cash shortages. To keep the
sample consistent, we only study contract signers here, but results on monetary constraints are similar if we
include all respondents.
42Theotheroptionswerethatshortageofcashwasveryimportantorextremelyimportantindetermining
CRM decisions. Alternative classification which classifies cash shortage as being unimportant if the respon-
dent answered “Shortage of cash was not at all important” or “not very important” lead to qualitatively
similar results.
43Note that since there is no differential attrition in the standard versus upfront arms for the endline
survey, Lee bounds are not required.
22

they complied. Recall that the difference in compliance between the two contract types is
about 10 percentage points, so the increase in trust represents an economically significant
effect.44 We interpret this result as suggestive evidence that instilling trust was a mechanism
by which upfront PES was more effective than standard PES.
In contrast, farmers in the upfront arm were not more likely to report cash shortages
being unimportant for CRM decision-making. However, the absence of evidence here does
not necessarily imply the absence of an effect of upfront payments on the ability to pay for
CRM equipment. For example, the upfront amount (which could cover less than half the
cost of baler rental) may have been too low to meaningfully ease this constraint.
Appendix Table A.6 presents additional pre-specified heterogeneous treatment effects.
These include information constraints about alternatives to burning, barriers to accessing
CRM equipment, and beliefs about the negative impact of non burning alternatives on
yields, pest prevalence, or soil health. These heterogeneity results are estimated without
the control group, where the outcome is zero by construction. The correlation between the
heterogeneity variable in the pooled treatment group and compliance can thus be interpreted
astheheterogeneoustreatmenteffect. Farmerswithhigherinformationconstraintsandmore
negative beliefs about burning alternatives are less likely to comply with PES, pooling all of
the treatment arms.
5 Program costs and benefits
We set up a cost effectiveness comparison across treatments in Table 6. Column 1 shows the
treatment effects for farmer-level payments (zero by construction in the control group). We
exclude the cost of monitoring contract compliance because it is sensitive to program scale
and specific protocols around monitoring. Monitoring costs for our program were roughly
|300/field or less than |100/acre, which is small in comparison to the PES payments. The
results show that upfront PES pays out more, both because more people comply and because
44Note that the higher reported trust in the payment among farmers in the upfront PES treatment is not
limitedtothecompliersintheupfrontPESarms;levelsoftrustdonotvarywithcompliance. Incontrast,in
the standard PES arms, farmers who complied – and received payment – were around 10 percentage points
more likely to report a high level of trust in the payment.
23

farmers who burn also receive upfront payments. Columns 2 and 4 reproduce the treatment
effect on the binary variable of not burning shown earlier, using the balanced and max
accuracy models, respectively. Note the slightly different results across the columns, which
we return to below.
Columns 3 and 5 then show the cost per additional unburned acre, calculated by dividing
Column 1 estimates by the estimates in Column 2 or 4 for each treatment. (Figure A.6 shows
the results by treatment arm). In the balanced accuracy results, the effect on burning in
the standard PES treatment is very close to zero, resulting in a large but imprecise cost per
unburned acre (column 3). Despite higher payment per acre, the upfront PES treatment
remains more cost effective than standard PES, at a cost of around |2,695 per acre. For the
max accuracy, the tradeoff between treatment effects and cost effectiveness is more apparent.
For this measure, the effect of standard PES on burning (column 4) is small and statistically
imprecise, but considerably larger than with the balanced accuracy measure. The treatment
effect on not burning from upfront PES is also smaller using the max accuracy classification
than the balanced accuracy classification. Thus, upfront PES is “only” 4 times as effective as
standard PES. Because upfront PES entails 3 times as large a payment per acre as standard
PES, the cost-effectiveness gap between the contract types is not as stark: Upfront PES has
a cost of |4050 per unburned acre, compared to |5157 for standard PES (column 5).
Next, we compare these costs to the benefits of reducing crop burning. According to
the Global Burden of Disease-Major Air Pollution Sources, crop burning in India claims
an estimated 66,000 lives annually due to pollution exposure (Global Burden of Disease
Working Group, 2018). Using a $1 million Value of Statistical Life (VSL), this implies $66
billion of annual damages. Assuming 50% of paddy is burned, the combined paddy acreage
of 17.37 million acres in Punjab, Haryana, and Uttar Pradesh implies damages of $7599/acre
(|606,800), which are over 200 times the per acre cost of reducing burning through PES with
upfront payment.45
45We use estimates of percentage of paddy burned from Liu et al. (2020), who uses household-level data
from Punjab, Haryana, Bihar, and Uttar Pradesh, using a stratified purposive sampling technique to select
householdsrepresentativeofthevillage-leveldistributionoflandholdingsizes. Theyfindthat53%ofPunjab
households reported burning, with lower reported burning rates in Haryana and UP (10% and 9% respec-
tively). A lower burning rate (than 50%) would attribute the total damages to fewer acres, favoring burning
mitigation even more.
24

To put this cost per life saved in perspective, we compare it to other pollution abatement
options. Coal-fired power plants are a major source of particulate emissions in India, and
installing SO scrubbers lowers emissions of fine particulate matter. According to the Global
2
Burden of Disease 2018, thermal power claims 84,650 lives in India each year. Installing
scrubbers avoids 72% of deaths in the first year (Cropper et al., 2019), which would save
60,948 lives. India has 204 GW of coal capacity (Ministry of Power, 2022); on average,
installing scrubbers in a 500 MW plant would save 150 lives per year, and costs about
$1.2 billion over 20 years, or 60 million per year annualized. Assuming no discounting and
constant benefits for the lifetime of scrubbers, the cost per life saved is around $400,000. For
comparison, the cost per life saved from our most cost effective treatment is $4,800.46 Thus,
while several abatement opportunities have benefits that outweigh costs in India, residue
burning reduction has the potential to save lives at a much lower cost.
6 Conclusion
Identifying low-cost pollution abatement opportunities allows for more efficient use of lim-
ited environmental protection budgets. Even if promising opportunities are identified, lim-
ited enforcement incentives and market imperfections, such as credit constraints or weak
institutions, can undermine the efficacy of policies aimed at these abatement opportunities.
We show that crop residue burning, which has significant environmental and human
health costs, can be reduced through well-designed PES payments. In particular, program
design that takes institutional constraints and farmer concerns into account can significantly
improve efficacy. Providing a portion of the contract payment upfront results in larger
reductions in burning than providing the entire payment after participants have completed
costly behavior change. Despite higher “wasted” payments (to farmers who continue to
burn), PES with upfront payments is cost effective, resulting in burning reductions that
provide benefits far in excess of their cost.
Scaling up PES contracts to avoid burning poses some challenges. First, the monitoring
46Using above assumptions, crop residue burning causes 0.0075 deaths per acre annually. Reducing one
acre of burning costs |2695/acre, or |359,333 per life saved. At 75 |per $, this is $4,791 per life saved.
25

protocols that we implemented were not designed for scale. Viable approaches to large-
scale monitoring, such as remote sensing, are likely to increase contract risk because of
measurement error (though different forms of contractual risks may exist with scaled-up in-
person monitoring as well). Second, equipment to manage crop residue is still scarce, and
PES at scale will increase demand for this equipment, raising the cost of not burning. For
example, if all farmers began renting balers, the rental price of balers would rise.
There are also reasons for optimism. The roll-out of a large-scale PES program would
create incentives for innovation in better CRM equipment or rental market efficiency. Dy-
namic incentives — in the form of tying future eligibility to verified not burning — could
reduce the cost of providing upfront payments. The need for upfront payments also might
become less important as trust in being paid grows. Finally, PES programs are appealing
because they can be implemented by organizations that want to reduce fires but lack the
authority to levy fines. The enormity of the environmental damage caused by crop residue
burning in India justifies such an investment and also highlights the need for further research
to find viable solutions to this problem.
26

References
Aker, J. C. and K. Jack (2021). Harvesting the rain: The adoption of environmental tech-
nologies in the Sahel. Working Paper 29518, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Akresh, R., D. De Walque, and H. Kazianga (2013). Cash transfers and child schooling:
Evidence from a randomized evaluation of the role of conditionality. Policy Research
Working Paper 6340, The World Bank.
Attanasio, O. P., V. Oppedisano, and M. Vera-Hern´andez (2015). Should cash transfers be
conditional? Conditionality, preventive care, and health outcomes. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 7(2), 35–52.
Badarinath, K. V. S., T. R. K. Chand, and V. K. Prasad (2006). Agriculture crop residue
burning in the Indo-Gangetic plains: A study using IRS-P6 AWiFS satellite data. Current
Science 91(8), 1085–1089.
¨
Baird, S., C. McIntosh, and B. Ozler (2011). Cash or condition? Evidence from a cash
transfer experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4), 1709–1753.
Balboni, C., R. Burgess, A. Heil, J. Old, and B. A. Olken (2021). Cycles of fire? Politics
and forest burning in Indonesia. AEA Papers and Proceedings 111, 415–19.
Behrer, A. P. (2019). Earth, wind and fire: The impact of anti-poverty efforts on Indian
agriculture and air pollution. Working Paper.
Bhuvaneshwari, S., H. Hettiarachchi, and J. N. Meegoda (2019). Crop residue burning in
India: Policy challenges and potential solutions. International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health 16(5), 832.
Burke, M., L. F. Bergquist, and E. Miguel (2019). Sell low and buy high: Arbitrage and local
price effects in Kenyan markets. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(2), 785–842.
Carter, M., A. de Janvry, E. Sadoulet, and A. Sarris (2017). Index insurance for developing
country agriculture: A reassessment. Annual Review of Resource Economics 9, 421–438.
27

Casaburi, L. and J. Willis (2018). Time versus state in insurance: Experimental evidence
from contract farming in Kenya. American Economic Review 108(12), 3778–3813.
Cassou, E. (2018). Agricultural pollution: Field burning. World Bank: Washington, DC,
USA.
Chen, J., C. Li, Z. Ristovski, A. Milic, Y. Gu, M. S. Islam, S. Wang, J. Hao, H. Zhang,
C. He, et al. (2017). A review of biomass burning: Emissions and impacts on air quality,
health and climate in China. Science of the Total Environment 579, 1000–1034.
Coffman, L. C., J. J. Conlon, C. R. Featherstone, and J. B. Kessler (2019). Liquidity affects
jobchoice: EvidencefromTeachforAmerica. The QuarterlyJournal ofEconomics 134(4),
2203–2236.
Cropper, M. L., S. Guttikunda, P. Jawahar, Z. Lazri, K. Malik, X.-P. Song, and X. Yao
(2019). Applying benefit-cost analysis to air pollution control in the Indian power sector.
Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis 10(S1), 185–205.
Cusworth, D. H., L. J. Mickley, M. P. Sulprizio, T. Liu, M. E. Marlier, R. S. DeFries, S. K.
Guttikunda, and P. Gupta (2018). Quantifying the influence of agricultural fires in north-
west India on urban air pollution in Delhi, India. Environmental Research Letters 13(4),
044018.
Dipoppa, G. and S. Gulzar (2022). Fires: The political economy and health impacts of crop
burning in South Asia. Working Paper.
Distributed Active Archive Center (2018). MODIS and VIIRS land products global subset-
ting and visualization tool. Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
Edwards, R. B., W. P. Falcon, G. Hadiwidjaja, M. M. Higgins, R. L. Naylor, and S. Sumarto
(2020). Fight fire with finance: A randomized field experiment to curtail land-clearing
fire in Indonesia. Working Paper 55-e - 2020, Tim Nasional Percepatan Penanggulangan
Kemiskinan.
28

Fink, G., B. K. Jack, and F. Masiye (2020). Seasonal liquidity, rural labor markets, and
agricultural production. American Economic Review 110(11), 3351–92.
Fuller, R., P.J.Landrigan, K.Balakrishnan, G.Bathan, S.Bose-O’Reilly, M.Brauer, J.Car-
avanos, T. Chiles, A. Cohen, L. Corra, et al. (2022). Pollution and health: a progress
update. The Lancet Planetary Health.
Garg, T., M. Jagnani, and H. K. Pullabhotla (2021). Agricultural labor exits increase crop
fires. Working Paper.
Gin´e, X.andD.Yang(2009). Insurance, credit, andtechnologyadoption: Fieldexperimental
evidence from Malawi. Journal of Development Economics 89(1), 1–11.
Global Burden of Disease Working Group (2018). Burden of disease attributable to major
air pollution sources in India. Technical report, Health Effects Institute.
Graff Zivin, J., T. Liu, Y. Song, Q. Tang, and P. Zhang (2020). The unintended impacts
of agricultural fires: Human capital in China. Journal of Development Economics 147,
102560.
Jack, B. K. (2013). Private information and the allocation of land use subsidies in Malawi.
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5(3), 113–35.
Jain, N., A. Bhatia, H. Pathak, et al. (2014). Emission of air pollutants from crop residue
burning in India. Aerosol and Air Quality Research 14(1), 422–430.
Jayachandran, S. (2009). Air quality and early-life mortality evidence from Indonesia’s
wildfires. Journal of Human Resources 44(4), 916–954.
Jayachandran, S., J. De Laat, E. F. Lambin, C. Y. Stanton, R. Audy, and N. E. Thomas
(2017). Cash for carbon: A randomized trial of payments for ecosystem services to reduce
deforestation. Science 357(6348), 267–273.
Kramer, B. and F. Ceballos (2018). Enhancing adaptive capacity through climate-smart
insurance: Theory and evidence from India. Working paper, International Food Policy
Research Institute.
29

Lee, D. S. (2009). Training, wages, and sample selection: Estimating sharp bounds on
treatment effects. The Review of Economic Studies 76(3), 1071–1102.
Lee, K. and M. Greenstone (2021). Air Quality Life Index annual update. Technical report,
Energy Policy Institute at the University of Chicago.
Liu, T., M.E.Marlier, A.Karambelas, M.Jain, S.Singh, M.K.Singh, R.Gautam, andR.S.
DeFries (2019). Missing emissions from post-monsoon agricultural fires in northwestern
India: RegionallimitationsofMODISburnedareaandactivefireproducts. Environmental
Research Communications 1(1), 011007.
Liu, T., L. J. Mickley, S. Singh, M. Jain, R. S. DeFries, and M. E. Marlier (2020). Crop
residue burning practices across north india inferred from household survey data: bridging
gaps in satellite observations. Atmospheric Environment: X 8, 100091.
Ministry of Power (2022). Annual report 2021–22. Technical report, Government of India.
Murali, S., R. Shrivastava, and M. Saxena (2010). Green house gas emissions from open field
burning of agricultural residues in India. Journal of Environmental Science & Engineer-
ing 52(4), 277–284.
NASA (2017). Global fire emissions indicators, country-level tabular data: 1997–2015.
Technical report, Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN),
Columbia University.
NationalGreenTribunal(2015). VikrantKumarTongadv.EnvironmentPollutionAuthority
& Ors. Judgement.
Oanh, N. T. K., D. A. Permadi, P. K. Hopke, K. R. Smith, N. P. Dong, and A. N. Dang
(2018). AnnualemissionsofairtoxicsemittedfromcropresidueopenburninginSoutheast
Asia over the period of 2010–2015. Atmospheric Environment 187, 163–173.
Oliva, P., B. K. Jack, S. Bell, E. Mettetal, and C. Severen (2020). Technology adoption
under uncertainty: Take-up and subsequent investment in Zambia. Review of Economics
and Statistics 102(3), 617–632.
30

Pullabhotla, H. (2018). Fires, wind, and smoke: Air pollution and infant mortality. Job
Market Paper.
Rangel, M. A. and T. S. Vogl (2019). Agricultural fires and health at birth. Review of
Economics and Statistics 101(4), 616–630.
Rao, P. P., L. Pandey, E. Jagadeesh, U. K. Deb, R. Jain, and K. Basu (2012). Meso-level
database coverage and insights village dynamics in south asia.
Sarkar, S., R. P. Singh, and A. Chauhan (2018). Increasing health threat to greater parts of
India due to crop residue burning. The Lancet Planetary Health 2(8), e327–e328.
Sharma, H. (2022). 14 of 15 States had Asked for Higher MSP for Paddy Than What Centre
Announced. Indian Express.
Shindell, D., J. C. Kuylenstierna, E. Vignati, R. van Dingenen, M. Amann, Z. Klimont,
S. C. Anenberg, N. Muller, G. Janssens-Maenhout, F. Raes, et al. (2012). Simultaneously
mitigating near-term climate change and improving human health and food security. Sci-
ence 335(6065), 183–189.
Singh, D., N. Kundu, and S. Ghosh (2021). Mapping rice residues burning and generated
pollutants using Sentinel-2 data over northern part of India. Remote Sensing Applications:
Society and Environment 22, 1.
Vadrevu, K. P., E. Ellicott, K. V. S. Badarinath, and E. Vermote (2011). MODIS derived fire
characteristics and aerosol optical depth variations during the agricultural residue burning
season, north India. Environmental Pollution 159(6), 1560–1569.
Walker, K., B. Moscona-Remnitz, K. Jack, S. Jayachandran, N. Kala, R. Pande, J. Xue, and
M. Burke (2022). Detecting crop burning in India using satellite data. Working Paper.
31

Figure 1: Experimental Design
Control N = 486 (51 villages)
|800/acre
N = 310 (30 villages)
Standard pes
|1600/acre
N = 272 (28 villages)
|800/acre, 25% upfront
pes with
N = 285 (31 villages)
Upfront
|800/acre, 50% upfront
Payment
N = 315 (31 villages)
Note: Treatments assigned at the village level. See text for additional detail.
32

Figure 2: Experimental Timeline
July 2019 Oct Jan 2020 Apr July
Kharif crop (rice)
Sowing Harvesting
Rabi crop (wheat)
Sowing Harvesting
Surveys and intervention
Listing
Baseline
PES contracts
Monitoring & spotchecking
Endline
33

Table 1: Summary Statistics and Balance
Control Treatment Standard Upfront Upfront
N
vs vs vs vs Stan-
Mean SD
Control Control Control dard
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Panel A: Demographics
Age (years) 1668 48.675 12.732 -0.158 -0.448 0.124 0.610
(0.751) (0.816) (0.825) (0.653)
Total experience in agriculture (years) 1668 28.055 13.144 -0.184 -0.452 0.078 0.522
(0.788) (0.860) (0.874) (0.732)
Highest educational class passed 1658 7.213 4.197 -0.147 -0.200 -0.096 0.114
(0.228) (0.265) (0.270) (0.283)
1(Ever signed a written contract) 1440 0.483 0.500 -0.048 -0.049 -0.048 0.001
(0.039) (0.044) (0.044) (0.041)
Panel B: Income
Total income 1602 125.694 172.588 -4.655 1.060 -10.190 -10.352
(11.386) (12.886) (13.798) (14.493)
Non-agricultural income 1455 18.076 66.407 -1.393 -2.545 -0.277 3.150
(4.563) (5.136) (6.630) (8.084)
Total agricultural profit 1521 114.177 155.748 -2.759 4.674 -9.905 -14.483
(11.246) (12.700) (12.865) (12.426)
Total area of land in acres (measured) 1668 4.986 2.816 0.327 0.350 0.304 -0.049
(0.173)∗ (0.203)∗ (0.188) (0.181)
Paddy production in 1000kg 1513 13.250 9.593 0.684 1.069 0.308 -0.768
(0.625) (0.736) (0.700) (0.722)
Panel C: Heterogeneity variables
Liquidity constraints index 1668 0.504 0.500 0.011 0.020 0.003 -0.012
(0.039) (0.042) (0.044) (0.039)
Distrust index 1655 0.476 0.500 0.043 0.058 0.029 -0.032
(0.035) (0.039) (0.040) (0.034)
CRM information constraints index 1676 0.444 0.497 0.026 0.062 -0.009 -0.076
(0.034) (0.040) (0.039) (0.041)∗
CRM access constraints index 1651 0.445 0.497 0.076 0.078 0.073 -0.009
(0.033)∗∗ (0.036)∗∗ (0.038)∗ (0.034)
CRM negative beliefs index 1676 0.500 0.501 0.069 0.095 0.043 -0.060
(0.035)∗∗ (0.039)∗∗ (0.038) (0.032)∗
Panel D: Burning
1(Burned paddy residue in 2018) 1576 0.684 0.465 0.025 0.044 0.006 -0.037
(0.034) (0.037) (0.039) (0.035)
P-value of joint F-test 0.475 0.482 0.693 0.808
Note: ***(**)(*) indicates significance at the 1%(5%)(10%) level. Standard errors reported in parentheses.
Columns 2 and 3 shows the summary statistics for the control group in the baseline. Column 3 shows the
coefficient from regressing the baseline variable on a treatment dummy (taking value 1 if the respondent was
in any treatment group). Columns 5 and 6 are the coefficients from regressing the baseline variable on two
treatment dummies (taking the value 1 if the respondent was in a Standard PES treatment group, and taking
value 1 if the respondent was in Upfront payment PES treatment group, respectively). Column 7 shows the
coefficientfromregressingthebaselinevariableonadummytakingvalue1iftherespondentwasintheUpfront
payment group. Regressions in Columns 4,5, and 6 usethe control group as the comparison group. Regressions
in Column 7 uses the standard PES group as the comparison group. All regressions cluster standard errors at
the village level and include strata fixed effects. All income variables relate to income derived in the past 12
months and are measured in |1000. All index variables in Panel C are binary. There are 1,668 observations in
the baseline; 486 observations for the control group and 1,182 observations for the treatment groups.
34

Table 2: Program Outcomes
Farmer Farmer Contract
Found Eligible Take-Up
(1) (2) (3)
Standard PES 0.885 0.844 0.726
(0.014)∗∗∗ (0.019)∗∗∗ (0.023)∗∗∗
Upfront PES 0.879 0.833 0.718
(0.011)∗∗∗ (0.014)∗∗∗ (0.022)∗∗∗
p-val: Standard PES = Upfront 0.720 0.627 0.798
PES
Control mean 0.000 0.000 0.000
Standard PES mean 0.887 0.852 0.741
Upfront PES mean 0.880 0.837 0.728
N 1668 1668 1668
Note: ***(**)(*) indicates significance at the 1%(5%)(10%) level. Standard errors in
parentheses clustered at the village level. Strata fixed effects included. Farmer Found is a
dummyvariabletakingthevalue1iftherespondentwasavailableduringtheintervention.
Farmer Eligible is a dummy variable taking the value 1 if the respondent was available
during the intervention and had a bank account. Contract Take-Up is a dummy variable
taking the value 1 if the respondent signed a contract to participate in the PES program.
35

Table 3: Contract Compliance and Not Burning
Compiled Not Burned Not Burned
with (Balanced (Maximum
Contract Accuracy) Accuracy)
(1) (2) (3)
Standard PES 0.085 0.008 0.020
(0.015)∗∗∗ (0.042) (0.030)
Upfront PES 0.183 0.115 0.077
(0.020)∗∗∗ (0.042)∗∗∗ (0.032)∗∗
p-val: StandardPES=UpfrontPES 0.000 0.008 0.071
Control mean 0.000 0.202 0.091
Standard PES mean 0.084 0.198 0.098
Upfront PES mean 0.185 0.313 0.161
N 1668 1664 1664
Note: ***(**)(*) indicates significance at the 1%(5%)(10%) level. Standard errors in parentheses clustered at
the village level. Strata fixed effects included. Complied with Contract is a dummy variable taking the value 1 if
therespondentcalledtorequestmonitoringofhisplots,andmonitoringledtotheconclusionthattherespondent
complied with the contract i.e. did not burn his paddy residue. Not Burned takes value 1 if the farmer did not
burn any of his plots, and 0 otherwise. Column 2 classifies burning to balance type I and type II errors; column
3 classifies burning to maximize overall model accuracy.
36

Table 4: Crop Residue Management Methods
Baler Seeder
(1) (2)
Standard PES -0.010 -0.020
(0.037) (0.023)
Upfront PES 0.096 0.013
(0.039)∗∗ (0.026)
p-val: StandardPES=UpfrontPES 0.014 0.157
Control mean 0.199 0.102
Standard PES mean 0.171 0.087
Upfront PES mean 0.295 0.112
N 1387 1387
Lee Bounds
Standard PES
Lower bound -0.025 -0.028
(0.027) (0.021)
Upper bound 0.036 0.047
(0.025) (0.017)∗∗∗
Upfront PES
Lower bound 0.088 0.006
(0.030)∗∗∗ (0.022)
Upper bound 0.145 0.068
(0.028)∗∗∗ (0.019)∗∗∗
Note: ***(**)(*) indicates significance at the 1%(5%)(10%) level. Stan-
darderrorsinparenthesesclusteredatthevillagelevel. Stratafixedeffects
are included. Baler is a dummy variable taking value 1 if the farmer re-
ported in the endline that he used a baler. Seeder is a dummy variable
taking value 1 if the farmer reported in the endline that he used a happy
seederorasuperhappyseeder. ThesecondpanelshowstheLeeboundsfor
the treatment effects by treatment group. For details on the Lee bounds,
see footnote 31.
37

Table 5: Treatment Effects by Liquidity and Distrust
Panel A: Liquidity Constraints and Distrust
Outcome variable: Complied Burned Burned
Type of constraint: with contract (Balanced Accuracy) (Maximum Accuracy)
Distrust Liquidity Distrust Liquidity Distrust Liquidity
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Upfront PES 0.114 0.088 0.031 0.030 0.054 0.051
(0.030)∗∗∗ (0.029)∗∗∗ (0.032) (0.033) (0.029)∗ (0.029)∗
Highly constrained 0.030 0.010 0.021 0.007 0.003 0.014
(0.024) (0.022) (0.029) (0.035) (0.025) (0.030)
Upfront PES × Highly constrained -0.032 0.018 -0.037 -0.032 -0.025 -0.022
(0.036) (0.038) (0.039) (0.048) (0.039) (0.042)
Standard PES mean 0.083 0.084 0.167 0.167 0.104 0.105
Upfront PES mean 0.185 0.185 0.174 0.174 0.143 0.142
N 1172 1182 1168 1178 1168 1178
Panel B: Trust in Payment and Importance of Cash Shortage
Outcome variable: Trusted Payment Cash Shortage Not Important
(1) (2)
Upfront PES 0.068∗∗ 0.038
(0.028) (0.043)
Standard PES mean 0.854 0.441
N 580 584
Note: ***(**)(*) indicates significance at the 1%(5%)(10%) level. Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the village level. Strata fixed
effects are included. Panel A: Type of constraint is the heterogeneity variable which is indicated in the second row of the table: Liquidity is
an index indicating liquidity constraints, including constrained access to cash and loans. Distrust is an index indicating the farmer’s distrust in
categories of people and organizations. All indices are binary and take value 1 if the farmer’s constraints are larger than or equal to the
median. The Outcome variable is indicated in the top row: Complied with Contract is a dummy variable taking the value 1 if the monitoring
led to the conclusion that the respondent complied with the contract i.e. did not burn his paddy residue. The comparison group is the
Standard PES group. Panel B: Trusted payment takes value 1 if the respondent trusted that the payment by JPAL will be made if they did
not burn their paddy residue, and 0 otherwise. Cash shortage not important takes the value 1 if the respondent declared that cash shortage
was not an important factor when deciding which crop residue management method to use, and 0 otherwise. These outcome variables are from
the endline survey. The control group is excluded from the sample. The comparison group is the Standard PES treatment group. Only those
who signed a contract i.e. took up the treatment are included in the sample.
38

Table 6: Cost Effectiveness
Balanced Accuracy Maximum Accuracy
Amount Cost per Cost per
Not Not
Paid per Unburned Unburned
Burned Burned
Acre Acre Acre
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Standard PES 105.6 0.008 13440.5 0.020 5156.5
(21.7)∗∗∗ (0.042) (71152.0) (0.030) (7156.0)
Upfront PES 310.5 0.115 2695.0 0.077 4051.3
(15.4)∗∗∗ (0.042)∗∗∗ (948.7)∗∗∗ (0.032)∗∗ (1595.0)∗∗
p-val: Standard PES 0.000 0.008 0.879 0.071 0.864
= Upfront PES
N 1667 1664 1664
Note: ***(**)(*) indicates significance at the 1%(5%)(10%) level. Standard errors in parentheses clustered
at the village level. Strata fixed effects are included. Amount Paid per Acre (column 1) is the per acre
payment in | that the farmer received. This includes the amount paid upfront for those in the Upfront
PEStreatment, plustheamountpaidconditionaloncomplianceforthoseintheUpfrontandStandardPES
treatment. Not Burned takes the value 1 if the farmer did not burn any of their plots, and 0 otherwise, and
matches the estimates in Table 3. Cost per Unburned Acre is the Amount Paid per Acre divided by the
Cost per Unburned Acre (column 1 divided by column 2 or column 4). Standard errors in columns 3 and 5
are calculated using the Delta method.
39

Appendices
Appendix A: Tables and Figures
Table A.1: Accuracy Statistics, Holdout Sample
Accuracy model: Not Burned
Balanced Maximum
Accuracy Accuracy
(1) (2)
Mean accuracy 0.78 0.82
False burn 0.08 0.13
False no burn 0.14 0.05
True burn 0.51 0.59
True no burn 0.27 0.22
No burn accuracy 0.76 0.63
Burn accuracy 0.79 0.92
Note: Accuracy statistics for remote sensing measures
of burning, using different classifications thresholds. The
true/false burn/no-burn rows show counts of the number of
fields in each category. N =705.
Table A.2: Attrition from the Endline Survey
Attrition
(1)
Standard PES 0.051
(0.025)∗∗
Upfront PES 0.044
(0.025)∗
p-val: StandardPES=UpfrontPES 0.786
Control group mean 0.130
Standard PES group mean 0.187
Upfront PES group mean 0.182
N 1668
Note: ***(**)(*) indicates significance at the 1%(5%)(10%)
level. Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the village
level. Strata fixed effects are included. The outcome variable
is a dummy that takes the value 1 if the respondent attrited
from the endline.
A.1

Table A.3: Remote Sensing Based Burning Outcome (Plot Level)
Not Burned
Balanced Maximum
Accuracy Accuracy
(1) (2)
Standard PES 0.003 0.022
(0.046) (0.036)
Upfront PES 0.123 0.101
(0.045)∗∗∗ (0.036)∗∗∗
p-val: StandardPES=UpfrontPES 0.005 0.023
Control group mean 0.296 0.150
Standard PES mean 0.284 0.154
Upfront PES mean 0.432 0.265
N 2875 2875
Note: ***(**)(*) indicates significance at the 1%(5%)(10%) level. Standard errors in
parentheses clustered at the village level. Strata fixed effects are included. Plot level
regressionsareweightedbytheinverseofthenumberofplotsthefarmerhas. NotBurned
takes value 1 if the farmer did not burn any of his plots, and 0 otherwise. Column 1
classifies burning to balance type I and type II errors; column 2 classifies burning to
maximize overall model accuracy.
Table A.4: Spot Checks Based Burning Outcome
Not Burned
(1)
Standard PES 0.014
(0.077)
Upfront PES 0.105
(0.073)
p-val: StandardPES=UpfrontPES 0.233
Control mean 0.371
Standard PES mean 0.364
Upfront PES mean 0.456
N 715
Note: ***(**)(*) indicates significance at the 1%(5%)(10%)
level. Standard errors in parentheses clustered at the village
level. Stratafixedeffectsareincluded. NotBurnedtakesvalue
1 if the farmer did not burn any of his plots according to the
spot checks, and 0 otherwise.
A.2

Table A.5: Yield and Sowing Delay
Paddy Yield Wheat Yield Days
(1) (2) (3)
Standard PES -0.026 -0.013 -0.217
(0.039) (0.015) (0.643)
Upfront PES -0.066 0.008 -0.120
(0.045) (0.015) (0.627)
p-val: StandardPES=UpfrontPES 0.356 0.151 0.881
Control mean 1.249 0.745 18.364
Standard PES mean 1.237 0.736 17.943
Upfront PES mean 1.194 0.756 18.380
N 1367 1378 1386
Lee Bounds
Standard PES
Lower bound -0.103 -0.035 -1.032
(0.037)∗∗∗ (0.013)∗∗∗ (0.552)∗
Upper bound 0.037 0.008 0.320
(0.037) (0.015) (0.524)
Upfront payment PES
Lower bound -0.113 -0.013 -0.937
(0.037)∗∗∗ (0.010) (0.532)∗
Upper bound 0.005 0.027 0.425
(0.037) (0.012)∗∗ (0.505)
Note: ***(**)(*) indicates significance at the 1%(5%)(10%) level. Standard errors in parentheses
clustered at the village level. Strata fixed effects are included. Paddy Yield is a variable indicating
the amount of paddy produced in Kharif 2019 (log of 1000 kg per acre). Wheat Yield is a variable
indicating the amount of wheat produced in Rabi 2020 (log of 1000 kg per acre). Days is a variable
indicating the number of days after the paddy harvest that passed before the farmer started sowing
the Rabi crop. The second panel shows the Lee bounds for the treatment effects by treatment group.
For details on the Lee bounds, see footnote 31.
A.3

Table A.6: Heterogeneity of Treatment Effects on Contract Compliance: CRM Equipment
Constraints
Outcome variable: Complied with Contract
Negative Beliefs
Information
Type of constraint: Access Constraints about Burning
Constraints
Alternatives
(1) (2) (3)
Highly constrained -0.063 -0.004 -0.040
(0.019)∗∗∗ (0.024) (0.020)∗∗
Pooled PES mean 0.135 0.136 0.135
N 1182 1168 1182
Note: ***(**)(*) indicates significance at the 1%(5%)(10%) level. Standard errors in parentheses clustered
at the village level. Strata fixed effects are included. Type of constraint is the heterogeneity variable which
is indicated in the second row of the table: Information Constraints is an index indicating the farmer’s lack
of knowledge about CRM equipment. Access constraint is an index indicating the farmer’s difficulties in
accessing CRM equipment. Negative Beliefs about Burning Alternatives is an index indicating the strength
of the farmers negative beliefs about the impact of CRM equipment on soil health and yield as compared to
burning. All indices are binary and take value 1 if the farmer’s constraints are larger than or equal to the
median. The Outcome variable is indicated in the top row: Complied with Contract is a dummy variable
taking the value 1 if the monitoring led to the conclusion that the respondent complied with the contract i.e.
did not burn his paddy residue.
A.4

Figure A.1: Fires Over Time: modis Satellite Data
Note: Fire counts from September to December by year, based on modis imagery. Left panel shows the
state of Punjab; right panel shows study districts. The line at 2015 indicates the introduction of the
burning ban; the line at 2017 indicates the introduction of the two-year CRM subsidy.
A.5

Figure A.2: Signature of Burning in Imagery: Example
Around harvest time Just after burning
One week after burning
Note: Imagery from Sentinel-2 showing a study field.
A.6

Figure A.3: Distribution of Random Forest Predictions by Treatment
Note: The left panel shows the distribution of the continuous remote sensing measure of not burning for
the plots classified as having been burned. The right panel shows the distribution of the same measure for
plots classified as not having been burned. The classification uses the balanced accuracy, and restricts to
plots not included in the training data. The continuous remote sensing measure ranges from 0 to 1, where
higher values mean that it is more likely that the plot has not been burned.
A.7

Figure A.4: Treatment Effects on Program Outcomes
Note: Coefficients on top of bars. ***(**)(*) indicates significant difference between coefficients at the
1%(5%)(10%) level. Contract Take-Up is a dummy variable taking the value 1 if the respondent signed a
contract to participate in the PES program. Complied with Contract is a dummy variable taking the value
1 if the monitoring led to the conclusion that the respondent complied with the contract i.e. did not burn
his paddy residue. Not Burned takes value 1 if the farmer did not burn any of his plots, and 0 otherwise,
using the balanced accuracy which classifies burning to balance type I and type II errors. 800/acre is the
Standard PES group receiving |800 per acre conditional on not burning. 1600/acre is the Standard PES
group receiving |1600 per acre conditional on not burning. 800/acre with 25% upfront is the Upfront PES
group receiving |800 per acre of which they receive 25% unconditionally upfront and 75% conditional on
not burning. 800/acre with 50% upfront is the Upfront PES group receiving |800 per acre of which they
receive 50% unconditionally upfront and 50% conditional on not burning.
A.8

Figure A.5: Robustness of Treatment Effects on Not Burning
Note: The graphs show the control mean and treatment effects for binary remote sensing measures of not
burning based on different classification thresholds. The classification thresholds are indicated on the
x-axis. The binary remote sensing measures of not burning take value 1 if the farmer did not burn any of
his plots, and 0 otherwise. The first graph shows the mean of the remote sensing measure of not burning in
the control group. The second graph shows the treatment effects on not burning in the Standard PES
treatment arm. The third graph shows the treatment effects on not burning in the Upfront PES treatment
arm. The two red lines in the second and third graph indicate the thresholds used for the remote sensing
measures of not burning with balanced accuracy which classifies burning to balance type I and type II
errors, and with maximum accuracy which classifies burning to maximize overall model accuracy. The
remote sensing measure of not burning with balanced accuracy uses a threshold of 56 and the one with
maximum accuracy uses a threshold of 65.
A.9