NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE BENEFITS AND COSTS OF GUEST WORKER PROGRAMS:
EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM THE INDIA-UAE MIGRATION CORRIDOR
Suresh Naidu
Yaw Nyarko
Shing-Yi Wang
Working Paper 31354
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31354
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2023
Cung Hoang, Imran Idzqandar, Adi Jahic, Simran Kaur, Nitin Krishnan, Sunny Lee, Keren Neza,
Abdoulaye Ndiaye, Angela Orozco, Cyril Punnoose-Cherian, Stephanie Wu provided excellent
research assistance. We thank IFMR and Lekshman S.P. for their field work. This paper has
benefitted from feedback at various stages from Santosh Anagol, Dean Yang and Niha Singh. We
thank seminar participants at Chicago, Cornell Emerging Markets Conference, Dartmouth,
HKUST, Michigan, NBER Development, Notre Dame, UBC and Wharton. We also thank the
UAE Ministry of Human Resources and Emiratisation (MOHRE) for their help with this research
project. We thank MOHRE, UPenn IREF, NYU Abu Dhabi Division of Social Science and NYU
Abu Dhabi Research Institute (via Columbia REALM) for funding. All views expressed herein
are those of the authors and no other organization. All errors are our own. This study was
registered in the American Economic Association Registry for randomized control trials under
trial number AEARCTR-0001294. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w31354
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Suresh Naidu, Yaw Nyarko, and Shing-Yi Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Benefits and Costs of Guest Worker Programs: Experimental Evidence from the India-UAE
Migration Corridor
Suresh Naidu, Yaw Nyarko, and Shing-Yi Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 31354
June 2023
JEL No. J6
ABSTRACT
We estimate the individual returns to temporary migration programs using a randomized
experiment with several thousand job seekers in India applying to guest worker jobs in the United
Arab Emirates (UAE). Working with construction companies and the UAE Ministry of Labor, we
randomized job offers to potential migrant workers at recruitment sites. We measured effects on
labor market outcomes, well-being, social relationships, and work satisfaction, as well as on labor
intermediation costs, assets and debt. We find that workers who received the randomized offer
experienced 30% higher earnings, and those who take up the offer to migrate to the UAE doubled
their compensation. However, they also paid substantial upfront costs to labor intermediaries,
financed by additional debt, that reduced take-home pay by about 10%. Migrants also reported a
significant fall in subjective well-being, driven by increases in physical pain, effort, and heat.
There were no significant effects on loneliness or other dimensions of well-being. Our finding of
negative effects on well-being is consistent with the large share of workers offered jobs who did
not migrate to the UAE. Extrapolating using a linear marginal treatment effects framework to
workers who decline the UAE job offer, we find large and positive pecuniary returns to
migration, even including intermediary fees, but even larger non-pecuniary costs.
Suresh Naidu Shing-Yi Wang
Columbia University The Wharton School
420 West 118th Street University of Pennsylvania
New York, NY 10027 3620 Locust Walk
and NBER Philadelphia, PA 19104
sn2430@columbia.edu and NBER
was@wharton.upenn.edu
Yaw Nyarko
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
yaw.nyarko@nyu.edu

1 Introduction
Increasing migration from poor to rich countries has potentially large impacts on global welfare and
inequality. However, policies to facilitate such migration are politically controversial, as migrant
workers may be willing to accept employment conditions and wages that are considerably worse than
those of native workers, and native workers may bear the brunt of lowered wages. Ruhs (2013)
documents a trade-off between the quantity of migrants a country permits and the mobility and
rights accorded to those migrants. At one extreme end, non-democracies like Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC) countries implement huge guest worker programs that allow migrants temporary
visas with no pathway to citizenship. The scale of these programs (relative to the size of local
population) is enormous; in the UAE, more than 90% of the private workforce are migrants on guest
worker visas with the vast bulk from South Asia. The guest worker programs offer very limited job
mobility for the duration of the visa, which affects the balance of power between firms and workers
(Naidu et al., 2016). Owing to the potential scope for exploitation, such contracts have been panned
as repugnant economic transactions (Clemens, 2018). At the same time, many economists argue that
guest worker programs are among the highest return anti-poverty programs, emphasizing the large
earnings differentials and the fact that workers are choosing to migrate.
Despite the considerable amount of policy debate, quantitative evidence on the costs and benefits
of guest worker programs remains scarce. We conduct a large-scale randomized evaluation of the
effects of UAE construction job offers on male workers in India. We partnered with the UAE Ministry
of Labor (MOL) and two large, private construction firms.1 We follow UAE job recruiters around
several different states in India to survey potential migrants at baseline. In addition to the more
common focus on earnings, our paper provides causal estimates of the non-pecuniary benefits and
costs of a construction job offer in the UAE as well as the pecuniary costs. We collected four
rounds of survey data: one baseline, two tracking surveys, and one follow-up survey. Our survey
data include information on various work outcomes including earnings and employment, hours, and
reservation wages, as well as other outcomes such as subjective well-being, work satisfaction, and
social networks. We also consider how the experience of international migration can expose people
1TheMOLisnowcalledtheMinistryofHumanResourcesandEmiratisation.
1

to new groups and new experiences, leading to changes in their attitudes about groups of people,
inequality and democracy. In the international migration context, a particularly salient cost is the
expense of labor brokers, and we ask detailed questions about the contracts between prospective
migrant workers and labor market intermediaries, as well as debt taken on to finance these costs.2
We find that the pecuniary returns to migrants from guest worker migration are large, consistent
withevidencefrompreviousworkshowingthathouseholdsarebetteroff. Whilethepecuniaryreturns
are attenuated by the costs paid to labor intermediaries, they are amplified when in-kind benefits of
foodandlodging, providedbyUAEemployers, areincluded. Despitetheselargereturns, roughly50%
of the treatment group do not take the offer to go to the UAE, but instead choose to stay in India.
The presence of a large share of “never-takers”, despite large estimated pecuniary returns, suggests
significant non-pecuniary costs from guest-worker migration.3 Consistent with this interpretation,
we find significant negative effects on subjective well-being, and some measures of job quality. In
particular, we document that the jobs in the UAE are particularly unattractive relative to jobs in
India in terms of the physical effort required in the job and the climate conditions, with smaller and
insignificant effects on negative affects which might be expected to be lower for migrants, such as
loneliness, stress, and anger. Consistent with their assessment of these particular job amenities, the
well-being components that change significantly are higher physical pain and fewer experiences of
enjoyment. The large share of never-takers suggests that the constraints on increased guest worker
migration may lie in the choices of migrant workers themselves, and improvements in wages and
working conditions in the UAE could increase take-up of guest worker offers.
Using existing estimates of the pecuniary value of subjective well-being as well as the degree of
market power of UAE firms in the recruitment market, we calculate the potential efficiency gains
from improvements in guest worker labor standards. A doubling of total compensation (or similar
improvements in the labor conditions of migrant workers) would be affordable given the prior finding
that these workers are only paid half of their marginal product, and would induce full compliance of
treated workers, increasing take up of migrant job offers to 100%. costing firm profits, this type of
reform would more than double aggregate welfare.
2Toourknowledge,theliteraturealsolacksinformationonhowthecostsandbenefitsarebornbyworkers,firmsandlaborintermediaries.
3The evidence we present on this is also consistent with Lagakos et al. (2023) whose structural model suggests that high disutility at
thedestinationexplainsthelackofsubsequentremigrationamongseasonalmigrantswithinBangladesh.
2

In addition to estimating the impacts of the offer on a variety of outcomes, we also make use of
questionsabouttheirexpectationsatbaselineandtheirreservationearningsforswitchinglocationsat
endline. Our data on expectations at baseline allows us to examine whether potential migrants have
accurate information about their earnings prospects at the destination country. This is particularly
importantinthismigrationcontextwherepolicymakersareconcernedthatworkersarebeingdeceived
by unscrupulous labor intermediaries (UNODC, 2015). However, there has been little large-scale
evidence comparing expectations and realizations for migrants of guest worker programs.4 Similarly,
we have novel reservation wage data in the context of guest worker programs on how much a migrant
in the UAE would need to earn to return home to India, and how much a worker in India would need
to migrate to the UAE. These questions provide a way to calculate an alternative summary measure
of the disamenity value associated with being a migrant in the UAE.
Finally, we estimate marginal treatment effects (MTEs) of migration using the randomized offer
as an instrument, and, under a linear marginal treatment effect assumption (Brinch et al., 2017),
impute potential outcomes for always-takers (who migrate regardless of whether they receive the
randomized offer) and never-takers (who do not migrate regardless of whether they receive the ran-
domized offer) in the counterfactuals to their observed choices. While MTEs have been extensively
examined in a variety of settings in applied microeconomics, their implementation in the context
of migration is much less common, despite their tight connection to the Roy model (Vytlacil, 2002)
which is widely used to study migration (Borjas, 1986). The MTE approach allows us to quantify the
potential outcomes for those who choose not to migrate despite getting an offer, shedding light on the
determinants of migration decisions. We find considerable heterogeneity in the marginal treatment
effects: never-takers have somewhat lower UAE earnings, but significantly lower subjective well-being
in the UAE than compliers or always-takers, suggesting that there is considerable heterogeneity in
the taste for guest worker migration, even among workers who have selected into applying and are
sufficiently skilled to pass the screening test. We then use our experimental estimates to bound the
relative value of subjective well-being and income in the decision to migrate, and use prior estimates
of firm market power to show that a doubling of UAE wages (or equivalent increase in labor stan-
dards) would be feasible given the marginal productivity of the workers and sufficient to induce 100%
4Shrestha (2020) uses expectations to predict the decision to migrate internationally but does not compare expectations with actual
realizations.
3

take-up of migration and increase aggregate efficiency.
The migrant flow between South Asia and the GCC countries is the second largest circular
international migration corridor in the world after U.S.-Mexico (Azose and Raftery, 2019). Over
90% of the private workforce in the UAE are migrants, and 40% of the UAE migrant population is
from India. The nature of migration from India to the UAE is very different from Mexico to the U.S.
as the vast majority of migrants in our context migrate legally on two-year guest worker visas that
can be renewed, with both illegal migration and permanent migration being rare.
The role of labor intermediaries for international migration in our context is also important.5
For workers, labor intermediaries are essential for getting an international job. Among those who
migrate to the UAE, 100% of our sample used a labor intermediary, paying on average 64,000 INR
each.6 Paying these labor brokers represents the key financial cost to migration, and accounting for
these costs is necessary for accurate estimates of the returns to migration.7 We can use our estimates
to calculate that about 10% the gains from international migration is captured by intermediaries.
In this, we are related to a literature that has emerged on the role of intermediaries in trade and
globalization.8 As we detail below, agent fees in our context are close to 100% of the annual guest
worker premium in the UAE, and about five times higher, relative to the migration premium, than
the Mexico-U.S. fees for intermediaries.9 Concerns about labor broker fees have stimulated numerous
regulations, from governments on the sending and on the receiving side as well as the International
LabourOrganization, albeitwithlimitedsuccess. Thesecostsmaybealsocorrelatedwithunobserved
characteristics, making a randomized experiment important.
Our paper contributes to a literature estimating the impacts of international migration. The key
issue in this literature is how to address selection in who migrates. Most of the existing literature on
international migration uses natural experiments and other methods to solve the selection problem
and this literature has often focused on the Mexico-U.S. migration corridor (see surveys by Clemens
5Intermediariesarealsocalledlaborbrokersoragents.
6ThiscorrespondstooverUSD1000.
7Whileotherrecentpapershavestudiedinternationallabormarketintermediaries(Bazzietal.,2021;FernandoandSingh,2021),they
focusonexogenousvariationininformationaboutintermediaries(ratherthanexogenousvariationinmigrationopportunities)anddonot
havedataonthefeespaidbymigrantstotheintermediaries,norextensivedataonprospectiveworkerswhochoosenottomigrate.
8AtkinandDonaldson(2015)showthatinproductmarketsintermediariescaptureasignificantshareofthegainsfromtradeliberaliza-
tion. Inagriculturalmarkets,BergquistandDinerstein(2020),DhingraandTenreyro(2020),andMacchiavelloandMorjaria(2021)have
studied the role of imperfectly competitive intermediaries in agricultural markets. In labor economics there has also been a literature on
labormarketintermediariessuchastempagencies(Autor,2008;Dreniketal.,2020).
9The migration premium is the additional amount workers would earn in the host country relative to what they would earn in their
homecountry.
4

(2011); McKenzie and Yang (2022); Dustmann and G¨orlach (2016)). In terms of methodology, we
are most similar to the literature that solves the selection problem with visa lotteries. Prior research
exploitingvisalotteriesforpermanentmigrationhasfoundlargepositiveeffectsonearnings: 263%for
Tongan immigrants to New Zealand (McKenzie et al., 2010) and $58k for Indian programmers in the
U.S. (Clemens, 2013). The literature has also found ambiguous effects on well-being, with improved
mental health (Stillman et al., 2009), but worse blood pressure and hypertension (Gibson et al.,
2013), and lower happiness and respect (Stillman et al., 2015). However, the returns to permanent
migration to countries like New Zealand and the U.S. that take in very few migrants (relative to their
size) and give migrants a lot of labor market mobility as well as broader economic and political rights
is likely to be very different from the returns to the large-scale guest worker programs operated by
the GCC countries.
Research focusing on guest worker migration programs is quite nascent, despite long-standing
claims by economists that such programs are the most effective way to reduce global inequality
(Milanovic, 2016; Weyl, 2018).10 Using a propensity score approach, Gibson and McKenzie (2014)
estimate the impacts of a New Zealand seasonal worker program on Tongan and Vanuatu workers,
finding a 35% increase on household per-capita income and significant and positive effects on house-
holdsubjectivewell-being. Clemens(2018)looksattheIndia-UAEmigrationcorridorusinganatural
experiment of contracts cancelled during the financial crisis to look at household-level outcomes (in-
cluding debt, economic activity and subsequent migration of other household members). Mobarak
et al. (2023) finds a 60% return to household income five years after a visa lottery of Bangladesh-
Malaysia guest worker migration.11 We offer two key contributions to the prior literature. First, none
of the prior literature on the returns to guest worker programs accounts for the costs of labor mar-
ket intermediaries, or measure the contractual arrangements between brokers and workers. Second,
unlike these other papers which focus on the outcomes for households, our paper focuses on the out-
comes of migrant workers themselves, providing an important complement to the existing research.12
10Forexample,Rodrik(2007)writes,“Aguestworkerprogramisthemosteffectivecontributionwecanmaketoimprovingthelivesof
theworld’sworkingpoor.”
11Furthermore, whileBangladeshhasacentralizedlotterysystem, migrationfromIndiaisdecentralizedandmoresimilartohowmost
guest workers in different countries find jobs. Indeed, Mobarak et al. (2023) show large and significant differences in migration outcomes
betweenhouseholdswheremigrantswentviathelotterysystemversusthroughthedecentralizedprocess. Thus,theirexperimentalvariation
doesnotisolatetheeffectofaguestworkerjobalone,butalsotheeffectofeliminatingthesearchfrictionsandintermediationfeesthrough
thecentralizedlottery.
12The one exception is Gaikwad et al. (2022) which looks at the earnings of migrants in a randomized experiment of job training and
interviewaccessforservicejobsintheUAE,buttheyhaveamuchsmallersampleof248migrantsfromonestateinIndia(Mizoram)and
5

While households may be better off, the migrants themselves may bear the main brunt of the costs
associated during the period of migration. Thus, our survey of contemporaneous migration provides
a fuller picture of the costs they bear while outside of the home country to provide benefits to their
families. The focus in our paper on the migrant rather than the household allows us to be the first
study on guest worker programs to consider to what extent the gains in earnings are offset by worse
work amenities and lowered subjective well-being of the workers themselves. These non-pecuniary
determinants of migration decisions are important as they suggest policies that regulate conditions
of work in host countries could in fact expand migration opportunities.
We explore both physical and psychological dimensions of well-being. Individual migrants, sep-
arated from their primary social networks, may also bear large psychological costs. Reports of
loneliness and alienation among international migrants are common (Ponizovsky and Ritsner, 2004).
We are also able to look at other ways migration changes an individual, including their friendship
and co-worker networks. While migrants experience isolation from their pre-existing social networks,
migration also potentially exposes workers to much more diverse co-workers and the opportunity to
form new social ties. The exposure to new groups of people may be particularly important in the
context of India where intergroup conflict, often defined by religious groups, is significant. Thus,
we also examine whether migration changes attitudes about other religions and nationalities that a
worker is exposed to in the new country. This result ties into an existing empirical literature that
tests a theory advanced by Allport et al. (1954) that intergroup contact can reduce prejudice towards
others.13 Research outside of economics has considered whether interactions generated by migration
affects prejudice (e.g. Gessler et al., 2021; Hangartner et al., 2019) but the focus of this prior liter-
ature has been on how exposure to migrants affects natives’ attitudes about migrants rather than
how the experience of moving to a different country affects migrants’ attitudes towards both natives
and other groups.
Other research on guest worker programs has focused on changing features of such programs on
both wages and employer market power (Naidu et al., 2016), or information experiments, such as in-
forming workers about mortality rates (Shrestha, 2019).14 Kosack (2020) shows that such temporary
cannotdisentangletheimpactsoftrainingfromjobplacement.
13Paluck et al. (2021) provides a recent review of this literature, which has used randomized variation to show that intergroup contact
reducesprejudiceinsportsteams(Lowe,2021;Mousa,2020)andinclassrooms(e.g.Rao,2019).
14Naiduetal.(2016)alsofindevidencethatreformsintheUAEaffectedfirm-specificwagespaidtonewrecruitsfromsourcecountries,
6

migration programs encourage human capital investments, and Weyl (2018) stresses the contribution
GCC guest worker migration makes to reducing global inequality, even as Alvaredo et al. (2019)
describes the exceptional levels of inequality within these countries as the highest in the world.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. We present more details on the context, the experiment
and data collection in the next sections, along with summary statistics on the selection of migrants by
firms. We then describe our estimation strategy. Next, we present results on a variety of labor market
outcomes as well as effects on labor intermediary payments. We also examine other impacts including
well-being, work satisfaction, financial outcomes, attitudes and social networks. In our second-to-
last section, we look at heterogeneity in outcomes. This includes interpreting our data through a
generalized Roy model of migration and extrapolating potential outcomes from compliers to always-
takers and never-takers. Finally, we discuss our estimates in the context of the broader literature
and use numbers from prior research to calculate the efficiency gains of increasing compensation for
guest workers.
2 Background on the Migration Supply Chain
The recruitment of migrants to GCC countries is a decentralized process throughout India.15 On the
employer side, firms acquire authorization for visas from the UAE Ministry of Labor. Next, the firms
work with a labor recruitment company who sets up interviews at recruitment sites in around India.
Then, the firm applies for visas for the specific individuals who have passed the screening interviews.
In our sample, the labor recruitment company was based in Singapore and subcontracted with labor
intermediaries in India to set up interviews at construction training centers. Labor agents/brokers
physically accompany applicants to the interview location. Applicants undergo a skills test involving
actual construction materials in front of a recruiter from the company in UAE, and are offered a job
if they pass.
On the worker side, the search process through which they find out about job opportunities and
suggestingsomefrictionsinthemarketfornewrecruits.
15See(Naiduetal.,2016)formoredetailsonthestructureofthemigrantlabormarketandtheKafala systemwithintheUAE.Briefly,
workers are on fixed 2-year contracts with no opportunities to transition employers except at the end of the contract. If workers want to
leave their jobs to return to India without the permission of their employer, they can break the contract, but need to cover their airfare
backtotheUAE(roughlyINR12,000inoursampleperiod, orthreemonthsofUAEearnings)andmaybefinedasan“absconder”and
blacklistedfromfutureemploymentopportunitiesintheUAE.Laborcontractsincluderoomandboardandsomemedicalcoverage. There
isnolegalminimumwage,andlittletononativeEmiratiemploymentinthesectorsthatemploymostmigrants.
7

travel to interview sites is facilitated by labor brokers. Further, there are a large number of ancillary
tasks and expenses. A valid passport is necessary at the interview stage. After securing an offer,
the workers need to get additional documents in order, and pass a health screening. The flight to
the UAE is paid for by the firm in the UAE.16 Local brokers are universally used by Gulf-bound
migrants, and our sample is no exception, as shown in Panel A of Table 1, where 100% of UAE
migrants pay brokers for migration services.
Table 1: Summary Statistics on Labor Agents
Mean SD N
Panel A: Agent Services
Agent Use 1.00 0.00 1,223
Arranging for Travel 0.79 0.41 1,222
Paying for Travel 0.31 0.46 1,222
Helping with Logistics 0.85 0.35 1,219
Skills Training and Interview Prep 0.75 0.44 1,221
Applying for Passports 0.11 0.31 1,222
Applying for Visas 0.98 0.14 1,218
Paying for Visa Fees 0.38 0.48 1,129
Paying for Passport Fees 0.03 0.17 1,215
Access to Job Interviews 0.81 0.39 1,209
Help with Medical Screening 0.63 0.48 1,222
Panel B: Agent Fees
Total Agent Fee 64,442.42 12,815.57 1,220
Agent Fee Paid Upfront 1,615.26 6,308.77 1,219
Agent Fee Paid Contingent 60,442.04 17,158.19 1,219
Notes: Thedataarefromthefollow-upsurveyandthesampleincludesonlyindividualsintheUAE.
Concerns about the exploitative nature of these contracts abound, but there has been little
quantitative evidence on these contracts. We asked all the potential migrants in our sample about
the contracts with agents and the payment structure. In Table 1, we provide descriptive statistics
from the sample of migrants in the UAE on the nature of the contracts signed. The overall costs for
a migrant are large, averaging 64,442 INR (over USD 1000). This corresponds to about 40% of the
annual income of the Indian household at baseline. The agent fee entails two components: an upfront
cost paid by every prospective applicant and a second fee that is only paid contingent on a successful
job match in the UAE. The upfront costs are a relatively small share of the costs (INR 1615 or 2.5%
of the total fee). The vast bulk of the costs are contingent and paid only by the individuals who
16PanelAofTable1showstheservicesthattheagentprovidedforthemigrant.
8

secure a job offer in the UAE. The contingent fees are paid prior to leaving for the UAE, so migrants
incur a substantial level of debt in order to do so.
The 1983 Emigration Act, which required emigrants for work to acquire authorization from the
Protector of Emigrants at the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, was passed in wake of the rise of
emigration to the GCC countries in the 1970s. The Act required international labor recruiters to
be licensed by the government, and for overseas firms to recruit via a licensed recruiter. However,
enforcementofsomeaspectsoftheregulationaroundmigrantrecruitmenthasclearlybeenineffective.
For example, survey evidence indicates that agent fees regularly exceed the INR 10,000 maximum
prescribed by the law.17 There have also been Memoranda of Understanding between the UAE and
India around the rules and regulations governing migration, with the most recent in 2022, but these
have had little active enforcement, and in any case do not specify any minimum wages.
The multiple levels of intermediaries create ample scope for the gains from international migration
to dissipate. However, the descriptive evidence presented in the section cannot tell us the extent to
which the fees offset the earnings effects of migration. For example, workers with higher expected
wages or tastes for migration may pay agents more. We leverage our randomized experiment to
produce the first causal estimates of the costs of migration associated with these intermediaries.
3 Experimental Design and Data Collection
We partnered with two large construction firms in the UAE and the UAE Ministry of Labor.18 The
locations of the recruitment sites in our sample are usually construction training schools located in
Rajasthan, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Uttarakhand and West Bengal.19 At each recruitment
site, our enumerators conducted a short baseline survey while workers were waiting for their turn to
participate in the job skills test and interview with representatives from the UAE.20 While firms may
have a target number of positions to fill in a recruitment round, there is some uncertainty over the
17This includes our survey as well as Irudaya Rajan et al. (2009) who in a sample of 88 international emigrants from India find the
averagetotalcostofinternationalmigrationamongthoseworkingwithrecruitingagentstobeaboutINR51,000.
18WebelievethesefirmsarerepresentativeoftheexperienceofconstructionworkersintheUAEatlargefirms. Inourcontext,consistent
with the literature on workers in small versus large firms (e.g. Brown and Medoff, 1989), it is likely that large firms are more likely to
followlaborregulations. GiventhatmostmigrantworkersgotolargefirmsintheUAE,ourresultsarelikelyrepresentativeofthemodal
migrantexperience.
19The locations of the recruitment sites are indicated with the red dots in Appendix Figure A.2. The home districts of the workers,
shadedbydensityinthemapinAppendixFiguresA.2,areusuallyinthesamestateoraneighboringstate.
20Wemadeaslightadjustmenttothebaselinesurveysdonein2017ascomparedto2016toaddquestionsonassets.
9

numberofintervieweeswhowillshowuponagivenday. Thus, thereweretimeswhenourenumerator
team was unable to baseline all of the workers who appeared at a given recruitment site.21 In those
cases, we conducted the baseline survey via phone within a couple of days of their interview.22
All of the positions were in construction work, including job titles such as carpenter, mason,
painter, steel fixer and general helper. Within a job-firm combination, offered wages have very little
variation, and there is no opportunity for bargaining after recruitment.23 At the end of the day, the
firm’s interviewers provided us with a list of people who passed the firm’s selection process. Among
those who are above the firm’s bar for an offer, we randomize five out of seven workers to proceed
with the visa and return the list to the firm by the next day. Thus, each recruitment location, date
and firm represents its own randomization group. We have a total of 44 randomization groups. The
workers were told the next day whether the firm would be making them an offer and proceeding with
the visa application. Our randomization process was a natural extension of an existing system in
which firms request visas from the MOL and sometimes are granted all of them and sometimes fewer
than they request.24 The job interviews and our accompanying baseline surveys happen between
August 2016 and May 2017.
The next stage of the process involved the usual medical screening, criminal record check and
background screening of all visa applicants.25 The vast majority of workers pass this.26 The (few)
workers who do not pass this background check are still counted as treated in our intent-to-treat
analyses. The whole process of applying for a visa takes several months, and on average, workers in
our treatment group who go to the UAE arrive there to work 3.6 months after the job interview.
3.1 Selection
We are interested in two levels of selection. First, are men who apply for construction jobs in the
UAE different from the population of young men in India? Second, are the individuals who fail the
21Thisoccurredfor13%ofourbaselinesurveys.
22The phone baseline survey was slightly different. It excluded the Ravens-style visual ability test but included a few other questions
thatwerenotaskedinperson.
23Offeredwagesreflectthebasesalarysodifferencesbetweenearningsrealizationsandtheoffercanbedrivenbyovertimeandpromotions.
The lack of variation in offered wages within a job-firm combination implies that they do not change the offers based on local conditions
suchasthelocalwagerate.
24Inourpartnership,theconstructionfirmswereguaranteedanumberofvisasinadvancebutdidhavetoagreetoscreenmoreapplicants
thantheyusuallywouldneedtoforeverypositiontheywantedtofill.
25Thebackgroundscreeningincludescheckingwhethertheworkerisbarredfromre-enteringtheUAEuntilafteraspecificdate.
26Basedonasmallsamplefromoursecondtrackingsurvey,5%ofourtreatmentgroupdidnotpassthemedicalscreening,andanother
2.7%failedthemedicalscreening.
10

Table 2: Baseline Summary Statistics: Sample Applicants versus Population Statistics
IHDS Survey
Mean SD N Mean SD N p-value
Age 34.27 14.56 36443 28.14 6.22 4243 0.00
High School and higher 0.37 0.48 36392 0.37 0.48 4242 0.65
Hindu 0.77 0.42 36443 0.77 0.42 4243 0.55
Muslim 0.16 0.37 36443 0.13 0.33 4243 0.00
General Caste 0.33 0.47 36320 0.20 0.40 4215 0.00
Scheduled Caste 0.25 0.43 36320 0.37 0.48 4215 0.00
Other Backward Caste 0.36 0.48 36320 0.42 0.49 4215 0.00
Scheduled tribe 0.05 0.23 36320 0.01 0.11 4215 0.00
Annual earnings (in 1000’s) 210.21 375.96 36443 154.41 117.93 4141 0.00
Notes: The first three columns show summary statistics (mean, standard deviation and number of observations) from the IHSD
2011-2012formeninouragerangeandinourstatesofanalysis. Thenextthreecolumnsshowsummarystatisticsfromourbaseline
surveyofalljobapplicants(includingworkerswhofailthejobinterview). Thelastcolumnshowsthep-valuetestingthedifference
betweenthemeans.
job screening different along observables from the individuals who pass?
In order to assess selection into applications and interviews for these jobs, we compare baseline
characteristics of the job applicants in our sample (including those who failed the screening test) with
Indian population statistics from the Indian Human Development Survey (IHDS) from 2011-2012 in
Table 2. We restrict the IHDS sample to men in our age range and in the states of our analysis. The
sample in our analysis has a similar amount of education with 37% of both samples having a high
school degree. Our sample is lower caste than average, with only one-fifth of our survey sample being
general caste as compared with 33% of the IHDS sample. Our sample is slightly but significantly
less Muslim than the IHDS sample average. The average annual household income for our analysis
group is about 25% lower than the population average. Overall, this suggests that there is negative
selection into applying for these jobs.
Next, we compare baseline characteristics of the individuals who pass the screening test by the
UAE firms with those who fail in Table 3.27 The men searching for international jobs average around
28 years old with the workers who fail the interview being slightly older. The failed workers are
less likely to have completed high school. About 76% of the analysis sample is Hindu and this is
substantially higher (82%) for the failed workers. The failed workers are more likely to be lower caste.
They also score lower on a Ravens-style ability test and have higher locus of control. This suggests
27Note the number of observations vary across variables because we were unable to administer the visually based Ravens-style ability
testforthephonebaselineworkers,andthequestionaboutassetswasonlyaddedin2017.
11

Table 3: Baseline Summary Statistics: Applicants Who Pass versus Fail the Screening
Passed Workers Failed Workers
Mean SD N Mean SD N p-value
Age 28.00 6.13 3507 28.76 6.63 736 0.00
High School and higher 0.38 0.49 3507 0.30 0.46 735 0.00
Hindu 0.76 0.43 3507 0.82 0.39 736 0.00
Muslim 0.13 0.33 3507 0.12 0.32 736 0.54
General Caste 0.21 0.41 3481 0.13 0.34 734 0.00
Scheduled Caste 0.37 0.48 3481 0.38 0.49 734 0.50
Other Backward Caste 0.40 0.49 3481 0.48 0.50 734 0.00
Annual Household Income 154.56 117.26 3438 153.71 121.26 703 0.86
Expected Annual Income UAE 306.91 264.12 3479 300.35 272.70 737 0.55
Net Assets 899.55 1453.30 1927 850.86 1327.27 314 0.55
Ability Score 2.31 1.51 2943 1.82 1.39 737 0.00
Happiness 5.11 2.10 3507 5.05 1.91 737 0.46
Locus of Control 0.87 0.76 3423 0.97 0.76 700 0.00
Notes: Passedworkersarescreenedbythefirmasabovethebar;thissamplecomprisesofourtreatmentandcontrolgroups. Failed
workersdonotpassthefirm’sscreeningforajoboffer. Annualhouseholdearnings,expectedannualearningsintheUAEandassets
areinthousandsofrupees. Thelastcolumnshowsthep-valuetestingthedifferencebetweenthemeans.
some positive selection into passing the migration screening skills test. However, this selection is not
decisive, as unsuccessful applicants are not statistically different from the workers who pass in their
baseline earnings, expectations about their earnings in the UAE, net assets or subjective well-being.
In general, workers expect to double their annual earnings in the UAE as compared to what their
households earn in India.
One might also be concerned that the firms that select into our experiment are not representative
of the standard experience of guest workers in the UAE. While this does not capture all of the
important dimensions of jobs, Appendix Figure A.5 shows where the two construction firms in our
analysis are relative to the distribution of job offers in the UAE (using administrative data from
the MOL). Our two experimental firms were both almost identical to each other in terms of average
offers and also extremely close to the modal salary both in the whole UAE distribution as well as in
the construction sector.
3.2 Specification
We present our primary results as intent-to-treat estimates. We estimate the following regression,
where Treat is an indicator for whether individual i got a construction job offer in the UAE at this
i
12

particular recruitment center:28
yfollowup = βTreat +δ +ϵ (1)
i i FE i
This equation includes fixed effects for the randomization group, which corresponds to each recruit-
ment location and day for a particular construction firm.29 This is necessary as the randomizations
are done within these groups. In specifications with additional controls, we also include fixed effects
for the enumerator. Standard errors are clustered by randomization group.
Appendix Table A.2 shows the summary statistics from the baseline survey for individuals in the
treatment and the control groups. For most variables, the two groups are not statistically different
from each other at the standard levels. The exception to this is net assets where the treatment group
has significantly higher net assets than the control group.
Compliance with the randomization was neither automatic nor complete: treated workers can
choose not to take the job in the UAE, and control workers can get offers from other UAE firms,
or even the same UAE firm later at a different recruitment center. Appendix Figure A.3 shows the
summary statistics about where the individuals in the treatment and control group ended up at the
time of the follow-up survey. About 58% of the treatment group is working in the UAE at the time
of the follow-up as compared with 26% in the control group. While the main estimates we show will
be intent-to-treat estimates, we will also discuss instrumental variable estimates.
3.3 Attrition at Follow-up
We expected that finding this group of mobile individuals for the follow-up survey would be diffi-
cult. Thus, using the contact information from the baseline survey and from the partner firms, we
conducted two rounds of phone tracking surveys.30 We also conducted a phone survey of friends
and family using contact information from the baseline to try to obtain updated contact information
for the survey.31 For individuals we could not find via any of these mechanisms and whose baseline
28There are 65 workers who appear in multiple recruitment sites. For these workers, we define their treatment status by the first time
wemeetthem.
29Notewhilewepre-registeredtheexperiment,wedidnotpre-specifytheregressionsoroutcomevariables.
30ThetimelineforthesurveydatacollectionisshowninAppendixFigureA.1. Thefirstphonetrackingsurveybeginsfourmonthsafter
webeginourbaselinesurveys,andthesecondtrackingsurveybeginssixmonthsafterthat.
31We only conducted the friends and family survey for the subset of workers that we could not easily reach using phone numbers from
thebaselineandtrackingsurveysorthroughcoordinationwithourpartnerfirms.
13

addresses were clustered in locations where there were several people we could not follow up with,
we sent field teams to physically travel to the addresses that they provided in the baseline survey
to find them or their households and get updated contact information on the targeted individual.
The follow-up survey was conducted via phone from January 2018 to July 2019, and the average
time between the baseline survey and follow-up survey is 17.5 months. For workers at our partner
construction firms in the UAE, we coordinated with the firms to find appropriate times and places
to talk to the workers without firm representatives present.
We show statistics on the percentage of our analysis sample that we followed up with in Figure
1. For some individuals for whom we did not conduct a follow-up survey, we do have additional
information about them from either a tracking survey or a friends and family survey. Finally, we
also received administrative data on work contracts for anyone in our baseline data from the UAE
Ministry of Labor.32 Thus, for some individuals for whom we do not have data from any post-baseline
survey (follow-up, tracking, or friends and family), we do have information about their arrival into
the UAE in this administrative data set.
Figure 1: Rates of Follow-Up
Notes: Thisshowsthepercentofpeoplefromthebaselineanalysissampleforwhichwehaveeitherthefollow-upsurveydataordata
fromanothersource(trackingsurveys,familysurvey,MOLadministrativedata)whereeachsourceprogressivelyaddsmoreinformation.
Overall, our attrition rates are similar to or smaller than other comparable studies, but are
somewhat imbalanced. Clemens and Tiongson (2017) interview 44% of applicants migrating from
Philippines to Korea. Mobarak et al. (2023) interview 68% of their control group and 69% and 94%
of their two treatment groups. Gaikwad et al. (2022) find 63% of their sample in their endline survey.
32ThiswasmatchedintooursampleusingpassportnumberstolaborcontractsintheUAEafterthestartofourexperimentandbefore
Fall2017(whenwereceivedtheadministrativedata).
14

Similarly, we have more attrition in the control group than treatment group, and the attriters are
different from non-attriters along baseline characteristics.33
We do several things to address the issue of attrition. First, for all of the estimates, we also
include a specification where we re-weight using the inverse probability of selection into the follow-up,
predicted using only baseline characteristics and leaving out individual i in order to obtain unbiased
estimates. Appendix Table A.3 shows the baseline variables that predict attrition, and these are the
estimates that we use to implement the re-weighting of the estimates for attriters. Second, we make
use of administrative data on salaries and compensation of workers in our sample who are in the
UAE. Finally, we conduct bounding exercises for our main results.
4 Main Results
4.1 Impact on Working in the UAE
In Table 4, we first examine the impact of being randomly chosen to receive the job offer on the
probability that the individual is in the UAE at the time of the follow up. Given that migration
to the UAE is predominantly legal migration with a work visa, living in the UAE corresponds to
having a job in the UAE. The table is formatted so that each row represents two regressions. In
the first column, we show the coefficient on treatment in the parsimonious specification where the
only controls are the randomization groups. In the second column, we show the corresponding
coefficient in the regression where we include the additional controls for enumerator as well as the
re-weighting for attrition. The estimates show that the randomization did increase the probability
that the individual was in the UAE at the time of the follow-up by 29 percentage points in the
parsimonious specification and 24 percentage points with the additional controls and re-weighting.
Both estimates are significant at the 1% level, and the magnitude represents more than a doubling
of the rate of migration to the UAE relative to the control group. The results indicate that the
randomization was successful in generating a first stage by moving people to the UAE. Furthermore,
the estimates provide an approximate scaling for the subsequent intent-to-treat results. The intent-
to-treat estimates can be multiplied by about three or four in order to get estimates of treatment on
33SeeAppendixTableA.1.
15

Table 4: Impact of Job Offer on Migration Outcomes
Unweighted Weighted N Control Control
Rand Group FE All Fe Mean Std.Dev.
In UAE 0.29*** 0.24*** 2,314 0.23 0.42
(0.04) (0.04)
In UAE (Expanded) 0.23*** 0.16*** 3,557 0.25 0.43
(0.03) (0.02)
Months in UAE 3.44*** 3.28*** 2,368 4.60 7.86
(0.94) (0.71)
Home District Resident -0.20*** -0.15*** 2,314 0.57 0.50
(0.05) (0.04)
In UAE Experiment Firm (Expanded) 0.30*** 0.22*** 3,481 0.15 0.35
(0.04) (0.03)
Construction Job 0.14*** 0.13*** 2,008 0.71 0.45
(0.03) (0.03)
Notes: Eachrowrepresentsadifferentoutcomevariableandeachcolumncorrespondstodifferentspecifications. Thefirstcolumn
includes only randomization group fixed effects. The second column adds fixed effects for enumerator as well as re-weights for
attrition. Each coefficient estimate of the impact of a job offer is from a separate regression, and standard errors clustered by
randomizationgroupareshowninparentheses. ***,**,*denotessignificanceatthe1,5and10%levelsrespectively. Theexpanded
version includes individuals for whom we do not have a follow-up survey but we have information from other sources (friends and
familysurveyorMOL).
the treated.
The next row shows the same outcome of whether the person is in the UAE but the expanded
sample includes individuals for whom we did not conduct a follow-up survey but have other data
including the friends and family surveys and the administrative data from the MOL to determine
whether they went to the UAE. The treatment effects remain positive and significant at the 1% level
but the magnitudes here are slightly smaller. The third row shows the length of time in the UAE
since randomization, where those still in India are given zero, we find that the treated workers have
spent on average 3.4 months longer in the UAE.
In the fourth row of the table, we also look at a question in the follow up survey that asks
whether the respondent is currently residing in their home district. This indicator will equal zero
for all individuals who are in the UAE as well as for anyone who is working and living in India but
outside their home district at the time of the follow up survey. In the parsimonious specification,
we see the treatment group is 20 percentage points less likely to be residing in their home district
in India at the time of the follow-up survey. The coefficient drops to 15 percentage points with the
additional controls and weights. Both estimates are significant at the 1% level. These estimates are
smaller in magnitude than the impact on going to the UAE, suggesting that a large share of the
16

control group are also migrating out of their home district but staying within India.
In the second-to-last row, we look at whether the person is working in the firm in the UAE for
which they interviewed when they were randomized into the treatment and control group. Fifteen
percent of the control group ends up at the same firm.34 The treatment group is 30% more likely
to be in the firm in the UAE for which they interviewed in the baseline survey in the parsimonious
specification and 22% more likely with the additional controls and weighting. Both estimates are
significant at the 1% level, and show that a job offer from a specific firm is an important determinant
of the migration decision.
Finally, in the last row, we look at the type of job that the person is working in. While most
of the control group are working in construction, the impact of getting the UAE job offer increases
the probability that a person is in the construction industry by 13 to 14 percentage points. These
estimates are significant at the 1% level.
4.2 Impacts on Labor Market Outcomes
We next look at the impact of randomly receiving the offer on subjects’ labor market outcomes in
Table 5. We begin with total compensation which includes earnings and the value of housing and
food provided by the employer which are the two main categories of in-kind benefits that workers
in the UAE commonly receive.35 This market value of these two in-kind benefits are specified in
the employment contract, so workers have a good idea of these numbers. The measure is the total
compensation per month in thousands of rupees.36 The total monthly compensation of the treated
individuals is 5170 INR higher than in the control group in the parsimonious specification and 4480
higher with the additional controls and weights. Both estimates are significant at the 1% level. The
intention-to-treat estimate here represents a 26% to 30% increase in compensation relative to the
control mean.37
It is unclear whether the workers value the in-kind benefits of housing and food at the market
value reported given that it should be much cheaper for them to live and eat at home in India. Thus,
34Thiscanoccureitherthroughtheworkersinterviewingwiththesamefirmagainatasubsequentrecruitingroundorthroughunobserved
noncompliancewiththetreatmentassignmentbythefirms.
35AppendixTableA.5showsthewordingofthequestionscorrespondingtotheoutcomescollectedinthefollow-upsurvey.
36Theresponsesinothercurrency,mainlydirham,areconvertedtorupeesusinganexchangerateforthemidpointofourfollow-updata
(October2018)fromtheIMF.
37AppendixTableA.6showsthecorrespondinginstrumentalvariablesestimatesoftreatmentonthetreated. ThemagnitudesoftheIV
estimatescorrespondtoscalingtheintention-to-treatestimatesbyaboutthreetimes.
17

Table 5: Impact of Job Offer on Labor Market and Well-Being Outcomes
Unweighted Weighted N Control Control
Rand Group FE All FE Mean Std.Dev
Panel A: Labor Market
Total Compensation 5.17*** 4.48*** 2,000 17.31 10.71
(0.89) (0.79)
Total Compensation (0 if unemp) 5.81*** 4.59*** 2,365 13.56 11.87
(1.00) (0.90)
Monthly Earnings 3.02*** 2.76*** 2,000 14.44 7.03
(0.55) (0.49)
Monthly Earnings (0 if unemp) 3.68*** 2.93*** 2,365 11.31 8.61
(0.67) (0.62)
Unemployed -0.07** -0.04 2,379 0.21 0.41
(0.02) (0.02)
Work Hours per Week 4.05*** 2.91*** 2,009 54.21 13.85
(0.92) (0.60)
Prefer Fewer Hours 0.01 0.00 2,008 0.04 0.19
(0.01) (0.01)
Commute Time -1.23 -1.00 2,005 35.33 38.78
(2.33) (1.79)
Panel B: Imputed Values
Total Compensation (0 if unemp) 4.84*** 5.60*** 2,603 16.00 12.57
(0.86) (1.36)
Monthly Earnings (0 if unemp) 3.12*** 3.93*** 2,603 12.92 8.98
(0.63) (1.22)
Panel C: Well-Being
Well-Being Index -0.16*** -0.13*** 2,379 0.12 0.97
(0.05) (0.05)
Work Satisfaction Index -0.02 -0.04 2,006 0.03 0.93
(0.07) (0.07)
Notes: Each row represents a different outcome variable and each column corresponds to different specifications. The units for
earningsandcompensationarein1000’sofINRpermonth. Thefirstcolumnincludesonlyrandomizationgroupfixedeffects. The
second column adds fixed effects for enumerator as well as re-weights for attrition. Each coefficient estimate of the impact of a
job offer is from a separate regression, and standard errors clustered by randomization group are shown in parentheses. ***, **,
* denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels respectively. Panel B imputes values of total compensation and average earnings
usinginformationfromadministrativedataincaseswherewelackfollow-upsurveydata.
18

we also look at a measure of average monthly earnings in the past year that includes only their take-
home earnings and excludes the value of any employer-provided benefits. Using this measure, the
treatment group is earning 2760 to 3020 INR more than the control group. This difference represents
an ITT of 19% to 21%. These estimates are also significant at the 1% level. In addition to the
regression estimates, Figure 2 shows that the distribution of earnings and compensation shifts clearly
to the right for the treatment group relative to the control group.
Figure 2: Distribution of Earnings and Compensation by Treatment Status
(a) TotalCompensation (b) MonthlyEarnings
Notes: Thefiguresshowthedistributionsofthevariablesusingkerneldensityfunctions. Eachvariableisshownseparatelyforthe
treatmentgroupandthecontrolgroup.
Getting the job offer in the UAE also decreases the probability that individuals in our sample are
unemployed by 4 to 7 percentage points. Note that the parsimonious estimate is significant at the
5% level but the estimate with additional controls and weights is only significant at the 11.7% level.
While the rate of unemployment in the control group is 21%, getting the offer in the UAE reduces
the probability that workers in the treatment group are unemployed by 18 to 31%.
Given that a number of people in the sample are unemployed (and do not report earnings), we
also look at a measure of total compensation and monthly earnings where we fill in missing values of
earnings with zero for individuals that report being unemployed and do not respond to the question
about earnings. The magnitude of the estimates are slightly larger and are significant at the 1%
level.
The treatment group is earning more but also working 2.9 to 4 more hours per week than the
control group (significant at the 1% level). On average, workers in the control group work 54.2 hours
19

per week, so this represents an increase of about 5 to 7%. Thus, if we were to adjust the earnings
impacts to an hourly wage, the treatment would have a positive impact on hourly wages. Regarding
hours, we also asked in the follow-up survey their preference for more or fewer hours of work. Very
few workers (4%) in the control group would prefer fewer hours.38 There is no statistical difference
for the treatment group on this preference despite the fact that the treatment group is working
substantially more hours.39 This provides some evidence against the idea that migrants workers in
the GCC are being forced to work excessive hours as represented in some media reports (e.g. McQue,
2022).
Finally, welookattheimpactoftreatmentontheamountoftimethatindividualsspendcommut-
ing one-way per day. Average commute times are not trivial for the control group where a one-way
commute takes 35 minutes. The estimates for the treatment group suggest that their commutes are
one minute shorter, though this difference is not statistically different at the standard levels. Dormi-
tory compounds for migrant workers in the UAE tend to be located well outside of the city centers
and they are bussed into the city for construction jobs.
While all of the estimates discussed so far on labor market outcomes (in Panel A of Table 5) make
use of only our follow-up survey data, we also consider the impacts on earnings and compensation
using the additional administrative data that we have from the MOL for the workers in the UAE.
Specifically, the administrative data set includes information specified in the contract between the
workerandthefirmonmonthlyearnings, andthevalueoffoodandhousingprovidedbytheemployer.
Thus, we can use this MOL contract salary to impute average earnings and total compensation for
workers who are in the UAE but for whom we do not have follow-up survey data.
AsdiscussedinJosephetal.(2018), thecontractsalaryspecifiedintheMOLisalowerboundbase
salary where workers often earn more than that amount depending on the overtime hours that they
work. Thus, we first estimate the relationship between contract salary and contract compensation
(including the value of in-kind benefits) in the MOL and reported earnings and compensation in the
surveydataforindividualsforwhomwehavebothdata.40 Then, wetakethecoefficientestimatesand
combine it with the MOL contract salary and compensation to impute earnings and compensation
38Onaverageinthecontrolgroup,63%wouldprefermorehoursandtheremaining33%wouldpreferthesamenumberofhours.
39Themagnitudeofthecoefficientisalsoclosetozero.
40TheestimatesareshowninAppendixTableA.4.
20

values, respectively, for individuals for whom we are missing follow-up data. As shown in Panel B
of Table 5, the range around the coefficient estimates when we expand the sample to include these
imputed values of the dependent variable are very similar to the estimates without the imputations.41
These results provide additional support against the idea that our findings are driven by attrition.
4.2.1 Expectations at Baseline
One concern that arises regarding migration is whether people have the right expectations regarding
thereturnstomigrationatthetimethattheyaremakingtheirdecision(McKenzie,2023). Numerous
stories abound documenting unscrupulous practices by labor intermediaries who promise jobs with
higher salaries or better conditions and benefits than reality.42 In this particular context, this can
also arise not only through direct dishonesty but because migrants are given a contract with a base
salary but they expect to get overtime hours beyond their base salary with overtime pay at a higher
wage rate.
We compute the difference between how much they expected to earn in the UAE at the time of
the baseline survey in India and how much they are actually earning at the time of the follow-up
survey. Figure 3 shows the log difference between their actual earnings in the follow-up survey and
the amount that they expected to earn prior to migration for those in the UAE at follow-up (in the
solid black line) as compared to those in India at follow-up (in the dashed grey line). For those in
the UAE, the distribution of the difference between what they expected to earn and what they are
actually earning in the UAE is centered around zero. The mean log difference is -6.3%, so the average
worker is earning a little less than expected.
For those in India at the time of follow-up, the dotted grey line gives the difference between how
much they expected to earn in the UAE at baseline and how much they are earning in India. They
are earning less in India than they expected to earn if they migrated, consistent with the idea that
they only migrate for higher earnings. The mean difference for those in India is -73%. Thus, the
sample in India at the follow-up are earning 73% less than they expected to earn in the UAE at
baseline, but for the sub-sample who are in India at the time of the follow up survey, an expected
41Interestingly, the estimates from the parsimonious specification have smaller magnitudes than the estimates with the weights and
additionalcontrols,buttheimpliedrangefromthecoefficientsisverysimilar.
42Forspecificanecdotes,seeforexampleAuwal(2010).
21

Figure 3: Distribution of the Gap between Expected UAE Earnings and Actual Earnings by
Current Country of Residence
Notes: Thefiguresshowthedistributionsofthelogdifferencebetweenactualearningsinatfollow-upandbaselineexpectationsabout
earningsintheUAEusingkerneldensityfunctions. EachvariableisshownseparatelyforindividualsintheUAEandinIndiaat
follow-up.
gain of 73% is not enough to induce them to migrate on average as their reservation earnings for
migration require 87.8% higher earnings.43
In addition to earnings, we also asked in our baseline survey about their expected duration of stay
in the UAE. The average expected duration in the UAE is 32 months. The initial contract length
is 24 months, and 70% of workers report 24 months (exactly) as their expected duration, implying
that they only plan to stay the minimum required length of the work contract. Thus, workers are
not anticipating spending a long time in the UAE, despite the fact that they anticipate the wage
differentials to be quite large.
4.3 Impacts on Well-Being and Work Satisfaction
While we have demonstrated that Indian men earn substantially more in the UAE than in India, we
areinterestedinthebroaderimpactsofmigrationonthewell-beingandworkamenitiesofindividuals.
We ask a set of 8 standard questions on well-being about how often they experience the following
feelings in the last month: stress, worry, anger, sadness, pain, loneliness, enjoyment, happiness. They
respond on a 3 point scale: rarely, sometimes, often. We convert this to a single index of well-being
43This is based on a survey question we asked at follow-up about the reservation earnings needed for those in India to migrate to the
UAEthatwedescribeinmoredetailbelow.
22

that is a standardized weighted index with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.44 First, Panel
A of Figure 4 shows the density functions for the index of well-being for the treatment group and the
control group. We can see a clear shift to the left in the distribution of well-being for the treatment
group relative to the control. In these distributions, the treatment effect is a decline of 16% of a
standard deviation for treated relative to control.
Figure 4: Distribution of Well-Being and Work Satisfaction by Treatment Status
(a) Well-being (b) WorkSatisfaction
Notes: Thefiguresshowthedistributionsofthevariablesusingkerneldensityfunctions. Eachvariableisshownseparatelyforthe
treatmentgroupandthecontrolgroup. Bothoutcomesarestandardizedtohaveoverallmeanzeroandunitstandarddeviation.
We also show the impacts in the regressions with additional controls in Panel C of Table 5. In
the parsimonious specification, we see a 16% of a standard deviation decline in well-being of the
treatment group relative to the control group. This is significant at the 1% level. With additional
controls and weights, the magnitude of the coefficient drops to 13% (significant at the 1% level).
We show the impacts on each of the individual components of the well-being index in Panel A of
Figure 5. The components are all standardized so that negative coefficient values correspond to being
worse off. The largest change in terms of magnitude is the increase in physical pain (and this estimate
is significant at the 5% level).45 While many of the components have negative coefficients, the only
other component that is statistically significant is enjoyment with the treatment group experiencing
less enjoyment than the control group. Perhaps surprisingly, the impact of getting an international
job offer on loneliness, while large in magnitude, is not statistically different from zero.
44WeuseaGLSweightingprocedurethatdownweightsthecomponentsthatarehighlycorrelatedwithothercomponentstomaximize
theindependentcontributionofeachcomponent.
45ThesefindingsaresimilartoBlattmanandDercon(2018)’sstudythatfindnegativeeffectsonphysicalhealthforthosewhorandomly
receivedaformal,industrialjobofferinEthiopia,althoughthoseoffersdidnotcomewithsignificantlyhigherwages.
23

We also ask a set of standard questions on work satisfaction on a five point scale from strongly
agree to strongly disagree. They are asked about climate at their workplace, the risk of accidents,
health hazards at work, supervisor providing encouragement, control over work hours, physical effort,
opportunity for promotion, fighting and bickering at work, supervisor unfairness, whether the person
would recommend this job to their friends, uncertainty in their workload. As with well-being, we
create a similar standardized index across these measures.
Figure 5: Effects on Components of Well-Being and Work Satisfaction
(a) Well-beingComponents
(b) WorkSatisfactionComponents
Notes: EachdotisthecoefficientonbeingofferedaUAEjobinaregressionwithaseparateoutcome. Thebandsaroundthedotgivethe
90%confidenceintervals. Theregressionsincluderandomizationgroupfixedeffects. InPanelA,theoutcomesarethecomponentsthat
comprisethewell-beingindexwhileinPanelB,theoutcomesarethecomponentsthatcomprisetheworksatisfactionindex,withphysical
workconditionsinredandothersinblue. Eachquestionisstandardizedtohaveoverallmeanzeroandunitstandarddeviation.
PanelBofFigure4showsthedensityfunctionsfortheindexofworksatisfactionforthetreatment
24

and control groups. The mean of the distributions are very similar though there is a bit more
dispersion in the treatment group than in the control group. The coefficient estimates from the
regressions (shown in the last row of Table 5) are not statistically different from zero. While media
reports on migrants working in the Gulf focus on poor working conditions (e.g. McQue, 2022), our
results indicate that overall working conditions in India are similarly poor.
The regression coefficients for each component of work satisfaction are shown in Panel B of Figure
5. These are presented so that positive estimates mean better outcomes. While there is no effect
on the summary index of work satisfaction, there is a positive effect on some components and a
negative effect on other components. The treatment group reports significant increases in physical
effort needed for the job. This corresponds to them feeling more physical pain (Panel A of Figure 4).
There is also significantly worse climate on the job in the UAE, consistent with a lot of construction
workbeingoutdoorsandhighertemperaturesinUAEthaninIndia. However, migrantworkerstothe
UAE are significantly better off in terms of less accident risk, having more encouraging supervisors,
and having supervisors who are fairer to them.
Thus, while they are earning much more in the UAE, these men are experiencing substantial
declines in their short-run general well-being in the UAE. The negative effects are concentrated in
the physical dimensions of work. Workers have more physical pain, and this corresponds to the
construction jobs in the UAE requiring more physical effort, as well as the higher temperatures
the construction workers bear in the UAE. They also experience significantly lower enjoyment and
happiness, and, consistent with the more diverse friendships and co-workers we discuss below, they
are more likely to report loneliness (though the estimate on loneliness is not statistically significant).
4.4 Bounding for Attrition on Main Results
We have so far discussed results from two approaches to the problem of attrition: re-weighting and
using data from sources other than the follow-up survey. We also implement attrition bounds that
impute outcomes for attritors (Manski, 1989). First, for the upper-bound estimate, we assume the
attritors are 25% of a standard deviation above the mean for the treatment group and 25% of a
standard deviation below for the control group. Next, we generate a lower-bound where we assume
the attritors are 25% of a standard deviation below the mean for the treatment group and 25%
25

of standard deviation above for the control group. This approach assumes that the attritors in the
treatment and control group behave differently in such a way that creates the widest possible bounds.
The mean and standard deviation that we use are calculated separately based on whether they are
in the UAE or not and whether they are in the treatment group or not. This takes advantage of the
fact that we have more information than in most cases of attrition because we have administrative
data from the UAE MOL on whether the individual in the sample made it into the UAE, and allows
us to generate tighter, location-specific bounds.
Table 6 shows corresponding lower-bound and upper-bound estimates of the key labor market
and well-being outcomes. While the magnitudes of the coefficients mechanically must change as a
result of this exercise, it is reassuring to see that all of the results on total compensation and earnings
(in Panels A and B) remain positive and significant at the 1% level even with the relatively strong
assumptions associated with the bounding exercise. While the lower-bound estimate for work hours
is no longer significant at the standard levels, the direction of the effect on hours remains.
One result that is more sensitive to the worst-case scenario assumptions about the attritors is the
well-being index. The upper-bound estimate on well-being (in Panel C) is no longer negative. How-
ever, this upper-bound estimate is also not significantly different from zero, so we cannot reject that
it is actually negative. To explore the sensitivity of the estimates on well-being to the assumptions on
attritors further, in Figure 6, we vary the assumptions about attritors being different fractions of a
standard deviation above and below the mean rather than just the 25% fraction that are presented in
Table 6. Reassuringly, the results on well-being are robust to a slightly lower fraction above the mean
in Figure 6. The bounding estimates are robust if we assume that all attritors are 10% of a standard
deviation above or below the mean. The upper bound on the coefficient estimate is negative (but
not significant) when we assume attritors are more than 15% of a standard deviation above/below
the mean.
4.5 Impacts on Financial Outcomes
In Table 7, we first look at the impact on net assets (which is the value of various components of
household assets less their total debt). Those offered a job in the UAE tend to have fewer net assets
26

Table 6: Bounded Estimates of the Impact of Job Offer
Lower Bound Upper Bound N
Panel A: Labor Market
Total Compensation 2.39*** 5.36*** 3,169
(0.70) (0.64)
Total Compensation (0 if unemp) 2.86*** 5.78*** 3,534
(0.85) (0.76)
Monthly Earnings 1.13** 3.32*** 3,169
(0.42) (0.35)
Monthly Earnings (0 if unemp) 1.53** 3.83*** 3,534
(0.57) (0.48)
Unemployed -0.10*** 0.02 3,548
(0.02) (0.02)
Work Hours 0.54 5.91*** 3,178
(0.60) (0.50)
Prefer More Hours -0.10*** 0.10*** 3,177
(0.02) (0.02)
Commute Time -8.28*** 5.27*** 3,174
(1.41) (1.33)
Panel B: Imputed Values
Total Compensation (0 if unemp) 3.18*** 5.61*** 3,535
(0.80) (0.72)
Monthly Earnings (0 if unemp) 1.75*** 3.84*** 3,535
(0.53) (0.48)
Panel C: Well-Being
Well-Being Index -0.30*** 0.05 3,548
(0.03) (0.04)
Work Satisfaction Index -0.23*** 0.17*** 3,175
(0.04) (0.04)
Notes: Eachrowrepresentsadifferentoutcomevariableandeachcolumncorrespondstodifferentspecifications. Thefirstcolumn
assumesthatattritorsare25%ofstandarddeviationbelowtheirlocation-specificmeaninthecontrolgroupand25%ofastandard
deviation above in the treatment group. The second column assumes that attritors are 25% of a standard deviation above their
meaninthecontrolgroupand25%ofastandarddeviationbelowinthetreatmentgroup. Eachcoefficientestimateoftheimpact
of a job offer is from a separate regression, and standard errors clustered by randomization group are shown in parentheses. ***,
**,*denotessignificanceatthe1,5and10%levelsrespectively. Theregressionsincludefixedeffectsforrandomizationgroup.
27

Figure 6: Varying the Levels on the Bounds on Well-Being Index Estimates
Notes: Forthelower-boundestimates,eachdotinblackisthecoefficientestimatewhereweassumethatattritorshaveanoutcomethatis
afractionofastandarddeviationbelowthemeanwherethefractionisgivenbythey-axisvalue. Fortheupper-boundestimates,each
circleingrayisthecoefficientestimatewhereweassumethatattritorshaveanoutcomethatisthatfractionofastandarddeviation
abovethemean. Thebandsaroundadotgivethe90%confidenceintervals.
but this is not statistically significant at the standard levels.46 We look separately at whether the
UAE job offer affects total debt in the second row. We see an increase in debt of 6390 INR in the
parsimonious specification, and this estimate is significant at the 10% level. This represents a 19
percent increase in debt relative to the control mean. The coefficient is slightly smaller with the
additional controls and weighting, leading the estimate to only be significant at the 17% level. The
increase in debt is consistent with the idea that those offered a job in the UAE went into debt in
order to finance the payment of the labor intermediary fee and still have higher levels of debt at the
time of follow-up.
As expected, those offered a job in the UAE remit more to their families at home. They remit on
average4020INRmorepermonththanthosewhodidnotreceiveaUAEjobofferintheparsimonious
specification and 4030 INR more with additional controls. Both estimates are significant at the 1%
level. The estimates also suggest that workers in the UAE are remitting a very substantial share of
their cash earnings to their families at home in India.
Finally, we look at the amount that the individual has paid in labor intermediary fees for the
international job placement. Those offered a UAE job in our experiment paid between 12,450 to
14,370 INR more than those not offered the job in our experiment, and these estimates are significant
46AppendixFigureA.4showstheestimatesforeachcomponentoftotalassets. Thereisasignificantdeclineinthevalueofvehicleand
livestockassetsforthetreatmentgrouprelativetothecontrolgroup.
28

Table 7: Impact of Job Offer on Financial Outcomes
Unweighted Weighted N Control Control
Rand Group FE All Fe Mean Std.Dev.
Net Assets -74.30 -79.48 2,316 943.75 1,383.85
(78.22) (78.06)
Debt 6.39* 5.10 2,322 33.17 75.43
(3.25) (3.68)
Remittances Last Month 4.02*** 4.03*** 2,356 7.64 20.26
(1.42) (1.38)
Agent Fee Paid 14.37*** 12.45*** 2,303 28.73 32.04
(2.42) (2.28)
Notes: Eachrowrepresentsadifferentoutcomevariableandeachcolumncorrespondstodifferentspecifications. Thefirstcolumn
includes only randomization group fixed effects. The second column adds fixed effects for enumerator as well as re-weights for
attrition. Each coefficient estimate of the impact of a job offer is from a separate regression, and standard errors clustered by
randomizationgroupareshowninparentheses. ***,**,*denotessignificanceatthe1,5and10%levelsrespectively. Alloutcomes
arein1000’sofINR.
at the 1% level. Assuming that the intermediary fee effect is amortized over the expected duration of
the migration spell, this amounts to roughly 440 INR a month.47 Adding this sum to the remittance
amount, we can almost fully account for the total compensation gain from getting an offer: the
gains almost all accrue to the household, with roughly 9-12% going to labor intermediaries and
moneylenders. Given that total assets of the households show no gain at the time of the follow-up
survey, the results suggest that treated households are spending the remittances that they receive on
consumption, education, or other expenditures that do not generate additional assets in the short
run.
4.6 Impacts on Attitudes and Social Networks
Inadditiontohowguestworkermigrationaffectsearnings,financialstatusandwell-being,weconsider
how the experience of international migration alters people’s social groups and their attitudes about
labor markets and politics. Broadly, we are interested in whether international migration produces
new experiences and interactions with people with whom migrants may not have interacted before,
changing social networks. Further, we are interested in whether the experience of migration may
change people’s attitudes about the world, their host and source countries, and people from other
linguistic and religious backgrounds.
47This calculation uses the average expected duration in the UAE reported at baseline of 32 months and assumes no discounting. If
wetakeintoaccountdiscountingassociatedwiththefactthattheagentfeeispaidupfrontpriortomigrationandassumea2%monthly
interestrate,thisnumberincreasesto612INRpermonth.
29

First, we ask all survey participants whether they agree with the statement that people are
rewarded for effort, intelligence and skill in India and in the UAE in two separate questions. The
responses are recorded on a five point scale where 1 corresponds to strongly agree and 5 to strongly
disagree, but we convert the measure to a binary value of whether the respondent picked an option
above the median. This allows us to examine whether international migration shifts what people
think about whether people are rewarded for the kinds of things that we think well-functioning labor
markets should reward people for including working hard, intelligence and having skills in their home
country and in the destination country.
AsshowninPanelAofTable8,gettingajobofferintheUAEincreasestheprobabilitythatpeople
think you are more rewarded for effort, intelligence and skill in India. This estimate is significant at
the 1% level in the parsimonious specification and at the 12% level with the additional controls and
weighting. There is no significant effect of the job offer on their assessment of the returns to effort,
intelligence and skill in the UAE. This suggests that the experience of working and living in the UAE
shifts attitudes of Indian men towards thinking that India is relatively more meritocratic than the
UAE. Thus, while they earn much more in the UAE than in India, Indian workers in the UAE are
more likely to think that effort is rewarded in India.
We also ask respondents whether they think differences in income are too large within India and
withintheUAEandconvertthefivepointscaletoanindicatorabovemedianvalue. Weareinterested
in capturing how their attitudes towards income inequality may change as a result of international
migration. While the individuals in our sample are from households that earn considerably less than
the average in India (as shown in Table 2), they are not at the very bottom of the income distribution
in India. In contrast, while Indian workers enjoy a higher level of earnings in the UAE, they are
considerably lower in the income distribution in the UAE. Thus, one mechanism for a change in
attitudes about income inequality can be driven by the experience of living in a place with different
levels of inequality or the experience of being in a different point in the distribution. An alternative
mechanism is that their attitudes about inequality change as a result of earning more vis-a-vis others
in India. The estimates in Panel A of Table 8 suggest that being offered a job in the UAE corresponds
to a decline in their assessment of the income gap being too large in India and an increase in feeling
that the income gap is too large in the UAE. However, these two outcomes are sensitive to the
30

Table 8: Impact of Job Offer on Attitudes and Social Networks
Unweighted Weighted N Control Control
Rand Group FE All FE Mean Std.Dev
Panel A: Attitudes
Rewards in India 0.11*** 0.03 2,373 0.48 0.50
(0.03) (0.02)
Rewards in UAE 0.03 -0.03 2,204 0.68 0.47
(0.02) (0.02)
Income Gap in India -0.01 -0.06*** 2,367 0.75 0.43
(0.03) (0.02)
Income Gap in UAE 0.11*** 0.04 2,199 0.46 0.50
(0.04) (0.03)
Rating Other Religion 2.73 3.28** 2,314 72.52 31.48
(1.74) (1.59)
Rating Emiratis 2.77* 1.77 2,372 73.27 28.94
(1.46) (1.58)
Importance Democracy 0.12 0.11 2,379 8.81 1.84
(0.10) (0.09)
Panel B: Friends
Closest Friend: Same Religion -0.03* -0.02 2,266 0.85 0.36
(0.01) (0.01)
Closest Friend: Same Caste -0.07*** -0.06** 2,309 0.67 0.47
(0.02) (0.02)
All Friends: Same Language 0.03* -0.02 2,364 0.75 0.43
(0.02) (0.02)
All Friends: Same Religion -0.03* -0.01 2,363 0.38 0.48
(0.02) (0.03)
All Friends: Same Caste -0.01 0.01 2,355 0.24 0.43
(0.02) (0.02)
Friends Similarity Index -0.08* -0.09** 2,366 0.06 1.01
(0.04) (0.04)
Panel C: Work Team
Team Size -0.34 -0.06 1,972 8.58 10.06
(0.59) (0.57)
Share Same Language -0.03** -0.03** 1,889 0.93 0.21
(0.01) (0.01)
Share Same Religion -0.01 -0.01 1,687 0.71 0.34
(0.02) (0.02)
Team Similarity Index -0.10** -0.12** 1,897 0.09 0.93
(0.05) (0.05)
Notes: Eachrowrepresentsadifferentoutcomevariableandeachcolumncorrespondstodifferentspecifications. Thefirstcolumn
includes only randomization group fixed effects. The second column adds fixed effects for enumerator as well as re-weights for
attrition. Each coefficient estimate of the impact of a job offer is from a separate regression, and standard errors clustered by
randomizationgroupareshowninparentheses. ***,**,*denotessignificanceatthe1,5and10%levelsrespectively.
31

specification and only significant at the 1% level with one set of controls. The results on attitudes
about the income gap in India are similar to the findings of a concurrent working paper (Gaikwad et
al., 2022) that finds that migration to the Gulf leads Indians to reduce their support for government
redistribution.
Motivated by the presence of severe religious tensions in India, we also ask the respondents to
rate their feelings towards Indian Hindus and Indian Muslims using a feeling thermometer that has a
scale that ranges between 0 and 100.48 We construct the variable as how they rate the Indian in the
religion that is not the one that they belong to. The control group is solidly favorable towards those
in the other religion with an average rating of 72.5. Their feelings towards the other religious group
increases with international migration. As shown in Table 8 Panel A, the magnitude of the impact
of the intention-to-treat estimate is 2.7 in the parsimonious specification and 3.3 with the additional
controls and weights but only the latter is significant at the 5% level. This suggests that exposure
to different groups that accompanies international migration corresponds to a more favorable view
of other groups.
We also ask about the way our sample feels about Emiratis (citizens of the UAE). Overall, the
control group feels favorable towards them and assesses their feelings at 73.2.49 In the parsimonious
specification, we see that being offered a job in the UAE corresponds to a 2.8 degree increase in
their positive feelings about Emiratis (and this is significant at the 10% level). However, both the
magnitude of the estimates and significance drop with the inclusion of the additional controls and
weights.
Next, we are interested in whether Indians’ views on democracy changes as a result of their
move from their democratic home country to an authoritarian country. Acemoglu et al. (2021) show
that individuals become more supportive of democracy when democracies deliver positive economic
growth, and so migrants from a democratic, but poor country may become less favorable towards
democracy if they have a positive experience of living in the authoritarian, but rich, UAE. Alter-
natively, they may be more favorable towards democracy if they dislike the experience of lacking
political voice in the UAE. Specifically, in the follow-up survey, we ask how important it is to live in
48We explicitly explain that ratings between 50 and 100 are favorable and warm towards the group while ratings from 0 to 50 are
unfavorable.
49Interestingly,thisisverysimilartobutslightlyhigherthanthewaythattheyfeeltowardsIndiansofadifferentreligion.
32

a country that is governed democratically. We offer a scale from 1 to 10 where 1 corresponds to not
at all important and 10 to absolutely important. The average answer in the control group is high at
8.81 out of 10. The coefficient estimate for those offered jobs in the UAE is positive but small and
not statistically different from zero. The lack of impact we find of migration from a democracy to an
authoritarian regime on preferences for democracy is also documented in Gaikwad et al. (2022).50
We next discuss how friendships change as the result of international migration. In the first row
of Panel B, we see that getting an international job offer corresponds to a decrease in the probability
that the person’s closest local friend has the same religion by 3 percentage points in the parsimonious
specification.For those in the UAE, they are asked about their closest friend in the UAE. For those
in India, they are asked about their closest friend in India. This estimate is significant at the 10%
level but loses significance with the additional controls and weights. Similarly, the probability that
their closest friend is of the same caste fell. This estimate ranges from -6 to -7 percentage points
and are significant at the 1% and 5% levels in the parsimonious specification and with additional
controls, respectively. In addition to questions on their closest friends, we also ask a set of questions
regarding whether they have any friends who speak a different language, is from a different religion
or is from a different caste. The estimates on these measures are sensitive to the specification and
not significantly different from zero with the additional controls and weights. To summarize these
dimensions of a worker’s social network, we construct a friends similarity index that combines all of
the questions on friends. In the index, we see that getting a job offer in the UAE leads to a significant
decline in having friends who are very similar.
While people can choose their own friends, we also consider whether they are exposed to different
groups through their work teams or whether work teams in the UAE are organized so that teams are
comprisedofverysimilarpeople. TheresultsinPanelCofTable8suggestthatmigrationtotheUAE
corresponds to working in teams with slightly different people. The share of teammates speaking the
same language declines by about 3 percentage points (significant at the 5% level). While there is no
significant change in the share of teammates that have the same religion, the team similarity index
that incorporates both the language and religion measures is negative and significant at the 5% level.
Finally, being offered a job in the UAE has no significant impact on the size of work teams.
50This contributes to a broader literature on the impact of international migration on attitudes about politics and democracy. (e.g.
CarejaandEmmenegger,2012)
33

Overall, the results suggest that migration to the UAE exposes these workers to different people
than they would associate with in India. They work with more diverse teams and choose friends,
including best friends, who are more different from them. Corresponding to increased exposure to dif-
ferent groups of people, we see that being offered the opportunity to migrate to the UAE corresponds
to having more positive opinions of people of other religions and Emiratis. Our findings correspond
to the existing literature that demonstrates that exposure on sports teams (Lowe, 2021) and in
classrooms (Rao, 2019) reduces prejudice against other groups and facilitates intergroup friendships.
Other attitudes change as well, including views on income inequality and what is rewarded in the
labor market in India. However, migration does not significantly change their attitudes about the
importance of democracy.
4.7 Heterogeneity
4.7.1 Heterogeneity by Observables
We begin by looking at heterogeneity in the effects of the UAE job offer by observable characteristics
of the individual at baseline. In Panel A of Figure 7, we look at the outcome of migrating to the UAE.
This provides us with insight into whether the migration decision varies by observable characteristics
among those who received a job offer in the UAE from our randomization. For baseline variables
that are continuous or categorical, we convert them into indicators for above the median value and
interact those indicators with the treatment variable. The figure shows the coefficient estimates
of the interaction between the indicator and treatment. For most variables, there is no significant
heterogeneity in take-up of the offer to migrate. The exception is higher levels of happiness at
baseline. This is significant at the 10% level. The result emphasizes that well-being is not just
an outcome that changes with migration (as we have shown) but people’s state of mind is also an
important determinant of the decision to migrate.
Next, welookatheterogeneityintheseestimateswhentheoutcomeistotalcompensationinPanel
B of Figure 7. Again, most of the estimates are not significantly different from zero at the standard
levels. Those with prior work experience in the UAE earn substantially and significantly more when
offered a new job in the UAE. Individuals who have higher household income at baseline, are also
significantly more likely to earn more when offered a job in the UAE. This coefficient is significant
34

Figure 7: Heterogeneity in Estimates
(a) InUAE
(b) TotalCompensation
(c) Well-Being
Notes: Eachpanelreferstoadifferentoutcomeofinterest. Eachdotcomesfromaseparateregressionandgivesthecoefficientestimate
fortheinteractionbetweenthatindicatorvariable(forwhetherthepersonisabovemedianvalue)andtheintention-to-treatvariable. The
bandsaroundadotgivethe90%confidenceintervals. Theinteractionsaregroupedbydemographics(inred),financialvariables(in
blue),andpsychometricmeasuresandability(ingreen).
35

at the 10% level. However, this does not seem to capture a correlation between baseline income
and education or cognitive ability because the interactions of the treatment effect and education or
ability are not significantly different from zero. In fact, the coefficient on the interaction of treatment
and more education is negative. Thus, the results suggest that while workers earn more in the UAE,
there are not higher returns to education or cognitive ability in the UAE as compared with India:
none of the variables that predict passing the skills test predict higher earnings in the UAE.
Finally, inPanelCofFigure7, welookatheterogeneityinthetreatmenteffectsonwell-being. For
this outcome, only one variable is significantly different from zero at the standard levels. Individuals
who have previously migrated to the UAE have much higher levels of well-being when offered another
job in the UAE. This is likely driven by selection: individuals who were happy with their prior
experience in the UAE are the ones who are likely to return to the pool of potential recruits.
But this pattern of heterogeneity by previous experience is also consistent with the presence
of non-pecuniary disamenities from UAE migration: workers with previous experience have higher
wages and higher well-being from migration, but also are no more likely to migrate, suggesting there
are relatively better non-pecuniary amenities (that do not raise well-being) in their options in India.
In particular, it suggests the disamenities of guest worker migration are not due to uncertainty about
conditions in the UAE, as presumably these are attenuated among migrants with previous UAE
experience and yet there is no difference in the probability of accepting the offer. The pattern of
heterogeneity by agent fee is suggestive: workers who have to pay more to their agents are more
likely to take-up jobs (significant only at the 13% level) and get higher compensation (significant
only at the 11% level). This suggests that agents may be playing an important role in arbitraging
the migrant labor market, as workers are willing to pay to get better paying jobs.
It is noteworthy that there are no significant differences in any of these three key outcomes by
either marital status or having children.51 While it is likely that the migration decisions of these
workers and the substantial remittances they send home improve the welfare of household members
at home in India, being married and having children does not change the propensity of those given
an offer to migrate, their earnings or their well-being.
51Theindicatorsformarriedandhavingkidsarebasedonsurveyquestionsatfollow-upbutweareabletoconstructwhethertheywere
marriedorhadchildrenatthetimeoffollow-upusingquestionsabouttheyearofmarriageandtheageoftheirchildren.
36

4.7.2 Heterogeneity by Unobservables: Marginal Treatment Effects
In this section, we build on marginal treatment effects (MTE) in models of self-selection developed in
theliterature(Brinchetal.,2017;Kowalski,2021;HeckmanandVytlacil,2007a,b). Weareinterested
in knowing whether the workers who do not take the offer when given are doing so because of lower
pecuniary returns or other, non-pecuniary costs or tastes for staying in India. The empirical model
has potential workers with utility for staying home (or distaste for migrating), denoted UD. A high
value of UD implies a worker has a high value of staying in India, and a low value of UD implies
a worker has a low value of staying in India. This is utility that is independent of the instrument
denotedbyZ,whichistherandomizedoffer,butcouldalsobeareducedformrepresentationincluding
various types of search frictions or other obstacles that impede getting a guest-worker offer, which
are reduced by the randomized offer. The monotonicity assumption ensures that randomly receiving
the job offer in the UAE makes the value of going to the UAE higher by reducing the cost. An
individual i migrates (D = 1) if the benefits minus costs, including the unobserved disamenity of
i
migrating, are greater than 0:
D = 1 ⇐⇒ γZ −UD > 0 (2)
i i i
The first-stage regression of D on Z recovers an estimate of γ. The randomization assumption
guarantees that Z ⊥ YUAE, YIndia, UD, but allows arbitrary correlations between YUAE,YIndia, and
UD. This allows, for example, individuals who have a high utility UD for staying in India to have
i
either higher or lower returns to migrating, YUAE −YIndia, than individuals with a low UD.
i i i
Given the lack of heterogeneity on observables, except for previous experience in the UAE, we
focus on the marginal treatment effect that is solely a function of the latent distaste for guest-worker
migration, UD, and suppress any dependence on observable Xs. We have then an expression for the
marginal treatment effect as a function of the unobserved disamenity from migration given by:
MTE(u) = E[YUAE −YIndia|UD = u]. (3)
The MTE in total compensation is the pecuniary return to migrating to the UAE. If all pecuniary
37

costs and benefits are observed, then the MTE in compensation is the willingness to pay for guest-
worker migration given a latent preference over staying home. The main constraint on estimating the
MTEisthelackofvariationinZ sufficienttotraceoutanon-parametrictreatmentresponsefunction.
However, inthecasewithabinaryinstrumentandbinaryendogenousvariable, wecanrecoveralinear
MTE function, as in Brinch et al. (2017), by extrapolating potential outcomes for always-takers and
never-takers. Note that monotonicity means that never-takers (who will not migrate regardless of
whether they receive the randomized offers) must have higher UD than treated compliers (who got
offers and migrated), and always-takers (who migrate regardless of receiving the randomized offer)
must have lower UD than untreated compliers (who did not get an offer and stayed in India). If
the MTE is linear, then the potential outcomes are linear, and monotonicity is sufficient to recover
potential outcomes for non-compliers.
In Figure 8, we plot the average outcomes derived from the marginal treatment effects in the
solid lines where UD is on the horizontal axis. The figure shows the outcomes for always-takers
and never-takers, and compliers in the UAE and in India. Under the Roy model interpretation,
the farthest right group, above p , must have the highest taste for staying in India (UD), and are
H
the never-takers. To the immediate left of this group there are two groups of compliers: those who
received the offer (i.e. the treatment group) and chose to migrate to the UAE and those who did
not receive the offer (i.e. the control group) and chose to stay in India. The difference between the
migrant and non-migrant compliers gives the local average treatment effect (LATE), averaged over
the randomization groups. The farthest left group, below p , are those that have the lowest taste for
L
staying in India, and are the always-takers. The threshold p = Pr(D = 1|Z = 0) corresponds to the
L
share of people who did not get the offer and still went to the UAE, while p = Pr(D = 1|Z = 1) is
H
the share of people who migrated conditional on getting the offer.52
52Intermsofobservables,thealways-takermeanoutcomesplottedareE[YUAE|D=1,Z=0],thenever-takermeansareE[YIndia|D=
0,Z=1],andthecompliermeanintheUAEis
pHE[YUAE|D=1,Z=1]−pLE[YUAE|D=1,Z=0]
pH−pL
whilethecompliermeaninIndiaisgivenby
(1−pL)E[YIndia|D=0,Z=0]−(1−pH)E[YIndia|D=0,Z=1]
pH−pL
.
38

Figure 8: Average Outcomes for Always-takers, Compliers and Never-takers
(a) TotalCompensation
(b) Well-Being
Notes: Thebandsaroundalinesegmentgivethe90%confidenceintervalsforthegroupascomparedtothecompliersinthesame
country. Outcomesshowncontrollingforrandomizationgroupfixedeffects,averagedoverrandomizationgroups.
Even without extrapolating to unobserved potential outcomes, we can already see that the “un-
treated outcome test” proposed by Kowalski (2021) reveals little selection into migration on the basis
of either well-being or total compensation in India because the never-takers have outcomes in India
that are very similar to the untreated compliers. Consistent with this, Appendix Table A.7 shows
that the only significant difference between compliers and never-takers out of 13 baseline character-
istics is happiness. However, compliers can still differ from never-takers on the basis of outcomes in
the UAE, but these outcomes are not possible to estimate without further assumptions.
Under the further assumption of a linear MTE function, the potential outcomes for the never-
takers in the UAE and always-takers in India can be extrapolated, as shown in the dashed lines in
Figure 8. A linear MTE implies that the outcomes from staying in India for the always-takers can
39

be computed from linearly extrapolating the YIndia of the untreated compliers and the never-takers.
Similarly the outcome of going to the UAE can be imputed for the never-takers from the observed
YUAE of the always-takers and the treated compliers.
In Panel A of Figure 8, we see that the never-takers have slightly lower potential YUAE, measured
as total compensation, than the compliers or the always-takers. As previously noted, there is very
littleheterogeneityinpotentialYIndia amongthevariousgroups,meaningthatalloftheheterogeneity
in the MTE (under the linear assumption) is coming from heterogeneous returns in the UAE. Panel A
of Figure 8 suggests that while never-takers have somewhat lower returns to migration than compliers
or always-takers, the marginal treatment effect of the UAE guest worker program are still large,
positive, and significant for them, so the large rates of non-compliance implies strong tastes for
staying in India. In Appendix Table A.8 we present analogous results for monthly earnings, and
then sequentially incorporating in-kind benefits and monthly agent fee payments. The table shows
that, under the linear MTE assumption, the source of the never-takers’ lower compensation is lower
monthlyearningsandin-kindbenefits,andthereislittleheterogeneityinpotentialagentfeepayments
by unobserved taste for migration.
The presence of strong tastes for staying in India is consistent with the results on well-being.
In Panel B of Figure 8, we see that for always-takers in the UAE, they have much higher levels of
well-being than the treatment group of compliers in the UAE (and this difference is significant at
the 10% level) though they earn on average a little less. This result implies that the always-takers
have a much smaller fall in well-being than the LATE implied by the compliers, and the LATE on
well-being is smaller than the extrapolated effect on never-takers. Together Panel A and Panel B of
Figure 8 shows that the heterogeneity is such that the workers who do not want to migrate (i.e. have
the higher UD) only have somewhat smaller pecuniary returns, but suffer large non-pecuniary costs,
as proxied by falls in well-being.53 In short, labor intermediary fees seem to be less of a barrier to
migration than the distaste for UAE migrant conditions of work, even net of the wage. Relative to
compliers, ourMTEestimatessuggestnever-takersexperienceafulladditionalstandarddeviationfall
in well-being from migrating, and still have more than 150% pecuniary returns to migrating. While
we do not have information on firms’ costs of increasing workers’ well-being, our results suggest that
53Wefindsimilar,butsmallerandstatisticallyinsignificant,patternsofMTEsforworksatisfaction.
40

improving the non-pecuniary experience of migration could increase the realized pecuniary gains,
more than reforming the intermediary system.
Given that our sample is drawn from the population in India who are interviewing for jobs in the
UAE, these estimates may be a lower bound on the non-pecuniary costs of guest work in the UAE.
We can further examine the external validity of our sample by looking at the observable differences
between the compliers, always- and never-takers and the workers rejected by the firm screening.
In Appendix Table A.7, we can see that all of the groups in the experimental sample have higher
education and ability than the rejected, suggesting that the returns to migration may be even lower
for those screened out by the skills test.
4.7.3 Evidence from Reservation Earnings
We can obtain another estimate of the non-pecuniary costs of migration by using questions about
reservationwages. Atthetimeofthefollow-upsurvey, weaskaquestionabouttheminimumearnings
that they would accept to switch locations. In other words, for each individual in the UAE, we ask
the minimum amount that they would accept to return to India, and for those currently in India,
we ask the minimum amount that they would accept to induce them to migrate temporarily to the
UAE. The difference between the wages of the UAE workers and their Indian reservation wages
measures the non-pecuniary costs of migration from India to the UAE. For comparison, we also
asked Indian workers the lowest wage they would take to migrate to the UAE, which would recover
the non-pecuniary disamenity, as well as any fixed costs. If workers reported reservation wages for
employment in the UAE above their current Indian wages, then this would suggest disamenities from
migration to the UAE.
Formally, if the UAE workers earn YUAE, and report the wage RIndia that would make them
indifferent, with UD being the non-pecuniary cost of migration, then YUAE = RIndia + UD and
i i i i
similarly YIndia = RUAE −UD. Among first-time migrants who are in the UAE (and thus have paid
i i i
the fixed costs), the taste for staying in India is UD = YUAE−RIndia for workers who have migrated
i i i
to the UAE and UD = RUAE −YIndia −F for workers still in India.
i i i
Figure 9 shows the distribution of the difference between log reservation earnings and log actual
earnings, separately for those in India (in the dotted grey line) and the difference between log current
41

Figure 9: Distribution of Disamenity from Being a Guest Worker in the UAE by Current Country
of Residence
Notes: Thefiguresshowthedistributionsofthegapbetweenthelogarithmofreservationearnings(tomovetotheotherlocation)and
thelogarithmofactualearningsusingkerneldensityfunctions. IntheUAE,thisislogreservationearnings(tomovetoIndia)minuslog
actualearningsintheUAE.InIndia,thisislogactualearningsInIndiaminuslogreservationearnings(tomovetotheUAE).
earnings and log reservation earnings in the UAE (in the solid black line).54 For those in India,
on average they need at least 87.8% higher earnings to induce them to migrate. Interestingly, this
number is in the ballpark of the percentage returns we actually see associated with migration in the
IV estimates (Appendix Table A.6). The amount needed to induce migration to the UAE is not
symmetric to the amount required by those in the UAE to return to India, suggesting some fixed
costs of migration. Those in the UAE would return to India for 20% lower earnings than what they
are currently getting.
4.8 Subjective Well-Being, Income, and Implications for Efficiency
We investigate the consistency of our estimates with the existing literature on subjective well-being.
Stillman et al. (2015) find negative effects of permanent migration on affective happiness and respect,
but positive effects on mental health. In contrast, we find little evidence of significant effects on
emotional components of well-being, and much more on physical dimensions, such as pain, effort,
and heat. We also find that migrants’ friends change, suggesting that they make new friends in
the UAE, and these friends are only somewhat less homophilic than the friendship networks in the
control group. The negative effects of migration in our sample seem to have less to do with psychic
experience of loneliness and distance from friends and family, and more to do with the physically
54This corresponds to UD. The distribution of the reservation earnings alone (not differenced with current earnings) are shown in
i
AppendixFigureA.6.
42

taxing nature of the work.
The idea that people can make a choice, including to migrate, that lowers their overall well-being
is consistent with results from Benjamin et al. (2012), which shows subjective well-being measures
understatestheroleandimportanceofincomeinhypotheticaldecision-making.55 Wecancharacterize
the payoffs, denoted by V, associated with the decision to migrate. For simplicity, suppose total
expected decision utility from themigration decision is proxied using the weighted average of log total
compensation minus agent fees (w) and standard deviations of well-being measured by σ. Given that
a significant majority of workers report only expecting to migrate for one spell, we restrict attention
to the static decision problem, abstracting from dynamics of wealth accumulation or learning about
UAE conditions. We normalize decision utility to be in the same units as subjective well-being,
and then have α represent the contribution of log income in those units. The idiosyncratic taste for
staying in India from the MTE estimates, UD then enters the decision to migrate as a random shock
i
to preferences to stay in India, and we scale it by β to convert it into units of subjective well-being.
The decision utilities are then:
VUAE = αE[wUAE]+E[σUAE] (4)
i
VIndia = αE[wIndia]+E[σIndia]+βUD (5)
i i
Since our treated compliers choose to migrate, and the distribution of UD is identical between treat-
i
ment and control, this implies a positive difference in VUAE − VIndia for treated compliers. We
i i
can calculate a lower bound on the value of income in well-being terms, α, with α∆w + ∆σ >
βE[UD|complier] > 0. Using the values for compliers in Table A.8, this gives us α > 0.42.56
i
While subjective well-being reflects a wide variety of work and non-work related conditions, there
is evidence that higher income itself raises well-being: a meta-analysis by McGuire et al. (2022) finds
that a 100% increase in income (one log point) due to unconditional cash transfers in poor countries
raises well-being by 10% of a standard deviation. Using lottery winners, Lindqvist et al. (2020) find
that the causal effect of a one point increase log income is 0.38 on a standard deviation of overall
55Thereisarichdebateontherelationshipbetweendecisionutility,subjectivewell-being,andeconomicwelfareinthebehavioralpublic
financeliterature. SeeBernheimandTaubinsky(2018)foranoverview.
56While we can obtain a lower bound on α from the compliers, we are unable to further bound α. The always-takers, who do not
experience any effects on subjective well-being, are uninformative about α. Under the linear MTE assumption used in Appendix Table
A.8,theupperboundonαfromthenever-takersyieldsα<1.69−βE[UD|UD >pH]butthisisnotusefulwithoutanestimateofβ,
43

life satisfaction, very similar to observable evidence from Stevenson and Wolfers (2013). Thus, the
negative effects on well-being are net of positive impacts on total compensation, and suggest the
effect of a one point increase in log income on decision utility (in units of subjective utility) is at
least 0.42 + 0.1 = 0.52 (using the (McGuire et al., 2022) estimate), and as high as 0.8 (using the
Lindqvist et al. (2020) estimate).
Naidu et al. (2016) estimate firm-specific new migrant recruitment elasticities for UAE firms of
1, suggesting that wages for new recruits are 50% of marginal product. A recruitment elasticity
facing the firm of 1 suggests that doubling total compensation would be both efficient (equating
wages to marginal product) and raise labor-supply by 100%. Is this consistent with our estimates
in this paper? A 100% increase in UAE total compensation, holding agent fees and non-income
changes in subjective well-being constant, yields total decision utility gain for never-takers by at least
0.52×(2×24.08−1.91−11.77)−(1.36−0.14) = 0.30 units of well-being using the numbers in Appendix
11.77
Table A.8.57 The doubling of UAE compensation changes the net decision utility of migration for the
never-takers from an imputed lower bound of −1.12 to 0.30, implying that the never-takers would
experience positive net decision utility from migrating, and thus choose to take the offered job.
One natural concern is that any gains from raising wages would be captured by labor brokers
through the fees they charge. However, our evidence suggests that this is unlikely. As shown in
Figure 7, there is no significant heterogeneity in take-up, compensation, or well-being by the agent
fee. Further, there is a rough ratio of 1 broker for every 3 workers in a district in our data, suggesting
that there is a fairly elastic and non-concentrated supply of brokers, so increases in the demand for
migration would not translate into large effects on agent fees.
The upshot of this calculation is that feasible increases in wages (or equivalent improvements in
workingconditions)couldincreasetake-upofguestworkerprograms, realizingconsiderablepecuniary
gains. Why does this not happen? The answer may lie in low firm-specific recruitment elasticities.
UAEemployersmayhaveconsiderablemarketpowerinIndia. Regulationspecifyingaminimumwage
that doubled the observed wages of every worker would be simply a transfer from UAE employers to
always-takers and compliers, with no efficiency benefits. But for never-takers, such a minimum wage
would raise the pecuniary migration surplus by 156% by inducing never-takers to migrate, while total
57Thisassumesthatnever-takersfacethesameamountofmarketpowerascompliers,butalsoassumesnever-takerswouldbepaidthe
(lower)linearextrapolationfromtheMTE,ratherthantheobservedUAEwageforthecompliersoralways-takers.
44

decision utility would increase by the equivalent of 0.30 of a standard deviation of well-being for this
group. Thus, with monopsonistic recruitment markets, regulation that increases the minimum wage
for guest workers would increase aggregate efficiency, with more gains for workers than the losses for
UAE firms.
It is unclear that it is in the interest of policymakers in the UAE to support a reform that helps
migrant workers at the expense of firms in the UAE. However, there are a variety of ways to solve the
problem of realizing the efficient level of migration while protecting firm profits. For example, the
UAE government could shift some of the surplus to firms by subsidizing recruitment through volume
discounts or rebates on visas, financed out of general tax revenues. Quantifying the social incidence
of reforms to guest worker programs is an important direction for future research.
5 Conclusion
Our paper presents results from a randomized experiment evaluating the impact of guest worker
programs on worker outcomes. Consistent with past research, we find large and significant positive
effects on earnings and income for workers given an offer. Including the value of in-kind benefits,
we estimate gross returns of INR 4700 to INR 5900. These returns are reduced by 10-15% once we
account for the substantial fees charged by labor market intermediaries. We find that workers have
generally correct expectations of their earnings in the UAE, and the bulk of agent fees are paid only
contingent on migration, which mitigates concerns about workers in our sample being defrauded or
coerced into migration, in contrast to popular portrayals.
Despite the large average returns to migration to the UAE, we have significant non-compliance
with the experimental job offer, with around half of the treatment group not migrating to the UAE.
We find evidence of selection on unobserved tastes for migration to the UAE. This interpretation is
also consistent with our estimates showing significant negative effects of migration on the well-being
of migrants.
The presence of unobserved heterogeneity in tastes for migration belies views of guest program
that implicitly assume a fully elastic supply of potential migrants, constrained only by recruiter
demand. Proponents of guest worker programs as a pathway out of poverty often assume that
45

workers in poor countries have a high demand for guest worker jobs, but visa limitations prevent
more individuals from developing countries from migrating. Our evidence suggests that the large
earning increases that we estimate with this kind of migration is still not enough to induce migration
among the pool of individuals offered the opportunity. The large number of Indians turning down
the opportunity is consistent with the large loss we find in individuals’ well-being associated with
these moves.
Still, many individuals in poor countries are not willing to give up their lives in their home
countries for much higher wages in the GCC. Our findings indicate that one key difference in the
jobs in the UAE as compared to India is that they are far more physically taxing and the climate
conditions are also harsher. Recruitment to guest worker programs is at least partially constrained by
eligible workers choosing not to migrate. Thus, while a lot of policy attention is paid to reducing the
upfront recruitment fees paid by migrant workers going to GCC countries, our results suggest that
improving wages and working conditions (particularly reducing physical toll and climate exposure)
of jobs in the UAE would have a larger effect in mitigating inefficiently low take-up of guest worker
job offers.
46

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Nicol´as Ajzenman, Cevat Giray Aksoy, Martin Fiszbein, and Car-
los A Molina, “(Successful) Democracies Breed Their Own Support,” Technical Report, National
Bureau of Economic Research 2021.
Allport, Gordon Willard, Kenneth Clark, and Thomas Pettigrew, The nature of prejudice,
Addison-Wesley Pub. Co., 1954.
Alvaredo, Facundo, Lydia Assouad, and Thomas Piketty, “Measuring lnequality in the Mid-
dle East 1990?2016: The World?s Most Unequal Region?,” Review of Income and Wealth, 2019,
65 (4), 685–711.
Atkin, David and Dave Donaldson, “Who’s Getting Globalized? The Size and Implications of
Intra-national Trade Costs,” Working Paper 21439, National Bureau of Economic Research July
2015.
Autor, David, “The economics of labor market intermediation,” NBER Working Paper No, 2008,
14348.
Auwal, Mohammad A, “Ending the exploitation of migrant workers in the Gulf,” Fletcher Forum
of World Affairs, 2010, 34, 87.
Azose, Jonathan J and Adrian E Raftery, “Estimation of emigration, return migration, and
transit migration between all pairs of countries,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
2019, 116 (1), 116–122.
Bazzi, Samuel, Lisa Cameron, Simone G Schaner, and Firman Witoelar, “Information,
intermediaries, and international migration,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Re-
search 2021.
Benjamin, Daniel J, Ori Heffetz, Miles S Kimball, and Alex Rees-Jones, “What do you
think would make you happier? What do you think you would choose?,” American Economic
Review, 2012, 102 (5), 2083–2110.
Bergquist, Lauren Falcao and Michael Dinerstein, “Competition and entry in agricultural
markets: Experimental evidence from Kenya,” American Economic Review, 2020, 110 (12), 3705–
47.
Bernheim, B Douglas and Dmitry Taubinsky, “Behavioral public economics,” Handbook of
behavioral economics: Applications and Foundations 1, 2018, 1, 381–516.
Blattman, Christopher and Stefan Dercon, “The impacts of industrial and entrepreneurial
work on income and health: Experimental evidence from Ethiopia,” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 2018, 10 (3), 1–38.
Borjas, George J, “The self-employment experience of immigrants,” 1986.
Brinch, Christian N, Magne Mogstad, and Matthew Wiswall, “BeyondLATEwithadiscrete
instrument,” Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125 (4), 985–1039.
Brown, Charles and James Medoff, “The employer size-wage effect,” Journal of political Econ-
omy, 1989, 97 (5), 1027–1059.
47

Careja, Romana and Patrick Emmenegger, “Making democratic citizens: the effects of mi-
gration experience on political attitudes in Central and Eastern Europe,” Comparative Political
Studies, 2012, 45 (7), 875–902.
Clemens, Michael A.,“EconomicsandEmigration: Trillion-DollarBillsontheSidewalk?,”Journal
of Economic Perspectives, September 2011, 25 (3), 83–106.
, “Why Do Programmers Earn More in Houston Than Hyderabad? Evidence from Randomized
Processing of US Visas,” American Economic Review, May 2013, 103 (3), 198–202.
, “Testing for Repugnance in Economic Transactions: Evidence from Guest Work in the Gulf,”
The Journal of Legal Studies, 2018, 47 (S1), S5–S44.
and Erwin R. Tiongson, “Split Decisions: Household Finance When a Policy Discontinuity
Allocates Overseas Work,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 07 2017, 99 (3), 531–543.
Dhingra, Swati and Silvana Tenreyro, “The rise of agribusiness and the distributional conse-
quences of policies on intermediated trade,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP14384, 2020.
Drenik, Andres, Simon J¨ager, Pascuel Plotkin, and Benjamin Schoefer,“Payingoutsourced
labor: Direct evidence from linked temp agency-worker-client data,” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 2020, pp. 1–28.
Dustmann, Christian and Joseph-Simon Go¨rlach, “The economics of temporary migrations,”
Journal of Economic Literature, 2016, 54 (1), 98–136.
Fernando, A Nilesh and Niharika Singh, “Regulation by reputation? quality revelation of labor
intermediaries in international migration,” Technical Report, Working Paper 2021.
Gaikwad, Nikhar, Kolby Hanson, and Aliz T´oth, “Bridging the Gulf: Experimental Evidence
on Migration’s Impact on Tolerance and Internationalism,” Working Paper, 2022.
Gessler, Theresa, Gergo˝ T´oth, and Johannes Wachs, “No country for asylum seekers? How
short-term exposure to refugees influences attitudes and voting behavior in Hungary,” Political
Behavior, 2021, pp. 1–29.
Gibson, John and David McKenzie, “The development impact of a best practice seasonal worker
policy,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2014, 96 (2), 229–243.
, , and Halahingano Rohorua, “Development impacts of seasonal and temporary migration:
A review of evidence from the Pacific and Southeast Asia,” Asia & the Pacific Policy Studies,
2013, 1 (1), 18–32.
Hangartner, Dominik, Elias Dinas, Moritz Marbach, Konstantinos Matakos, and Dim-
itrios Xefteris, “Does exposure to the refugee crisis make natives more hostile?,” American
Political Science Review, 2019, 113 (2), 442–455.
Heckman, James J and Edward J Vytlacil, “Econometric evaluation of social programs, part I:
Causal models, structural models and econometric policy evaluation,” Handbook of Econometrics,
2007, 6, 4779–4874.
and , “Econometric evaluation of social programs, part II: Using the marginal treatment effect
to organize alternative econometric estimators to evaluate social programs, and to forecast their
effects in new environments,” Handbook of Econometrics, 2007, 6, 4875–5143.
48