explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
© 2024 by Daron Acemoglu, Cevat Giray Aksoy, Ceren Baysan, Carlos Molina, and Gamze Zeki.
official NBER publications.
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
Research.
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations. The views expressed herein are those
(AEARCTR-0011480). The views presented are solely those of the authors and do not
Institutional Review Board (Protocol ID: E-4602) and registered with the AEA RCT registry
University Institutional Review Board (Protocol ID: E-20021704-604.02.02-51326) and the MIT
London, and the Institute for Humane Studies (IHS017372). It was approved by the Bahçeşehir
Bradley and Hewlett Foundation, the Centre for Governance and Society at King’s College
project would not have been possible without their support. The project received funding from the
volunteers, and the Turkish-American Gezi Platform for their invaluable contributions; this
We are deeply grateful to Evrim Bal, Görkem Başaran, Özer Dondurmacıoğlu, Oltaç Ünsal, the
October 2024
Cambridge, MA 02138
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
http://www.nber.org/papers/w33018
Working Paper 33018
Gamze Zeki
Carlos Molina
Ceren Baysan
Cevat Giray Aksoy
Daron Acemoglu
MISPERCEPTIONS AND DEMAND FOR DEMOCRACY UNDER AUTHORITARIANISM
NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ceren.baysan@utoronto.ca
University of Toronto
Ceren Baysan
cevat.aksoy@kcl.ac.uk
King's College London
Cevat Giray Aksoy gamze.zeki@su.se
Stockholm University
daron@mit.edu Gamze Zeki
and NBER
Cambridge, MA 02139 carlosmolinaguerra@gmail.com
77 Massachusetts Avenue Columbia, SC 29033
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 1014 Greene St
Department of Economics, E52-446
University of South Carolina
Daron Acemoglu Carlos Molina
and policies, and may be more malleable than typically presumed.
the support for authoritarian regimes may be coming from misperceptions about their institutions
beliefs about democracy and media freedom in Türkiye. The evidence suggests that at least part of
influencing those likely to vote for the governing coalition and those holding more misperceived
the field and online, the results are driven not by further mobilizing opposition supporters, but by
to a 2.4 percentage point (4.4 percent) increase in the opposition’s vote share. Interestingly, both in
similarly-sized impacts on the ballot-box level vote share—with the information treatment leading
3.7 percentage points (6.2 percent) in the online experiment. In the field experiment, we estimate
have significant effects on beliefs and increase the likelihood of voting for the opposition by about
providing (accurate) information about the state and implications of democracy and media freedom
in dealing with natural disasters and corruption (two salient issues in Türkiye). We find that
the extent to which democracy and media freedom have been eroded in Türkiye and their usefulness
especially those supporting the incumbent authoritarian government systematically underestimate
context of Türkiye’s May 2023 presidential and parliamentary elections. We confirm that voters,
preference for authoritarianism. We explore this question using online and field experiments in the
population’s misperceptions about their social and economic costs—as opposed to a general
This paper investigates whether enduring authoritarian regimes are in part rooted in the
ABSTRACT
JEL No. P16
October 2024
NBER Working Paper No. 33018
Daron Acemoglu, Cevat Giray Aksoy, Ceren Baysan, Carlos Molina, and Gamze Zeki
Misperceptions and Demand for Democracy under Authoritarianism

1
Throughout, we use media freedom and media independence interchangeably. 2
See here and here [accessed 31/8/2024] 1
deaths of more than 50,000 and the displacement of more than one million people. The effects
of mind for Turkish voters due to the massive February 2023 earthquake, which led to the
Weder [2003], Ferraz and Finan [2008], Larreguy et al. [2020]). These two issues were top
media freedom and corruption on the other (e.g., Besley and Burgess [2002], Brunetti and
disasters on the one hand (e.g., Besley and Burgess [2002], Cao [2024], Kahn [2005]) and
DEM data and findings in the literature on the relationship between democracy and natural
media freedom. This information reflects the actual evolution of Turkish institutions from V-
In both, we provide (accurate) information on the state and implications of democracy and
We use an online experiment and a large-scale field experiment, involving 880,000 voters.
with natural disasters and whether media freedom will be good for controlling corruption. 2
2003 and more pessimistic beliefs about whether democracy can be more successful in dealing
media freedom/independence in the country have evolved since Erdog̃an came to power in
supporting the governing coalition, hold more optimistic views about how democracy and
ceptions in the population, our baseline surveys reveal that Turkish voters, especially those
Freedom House [2024]). Consistent with the possibility that there may be systematic misper-
second largest deterioration in democratic institutions worldwide, only after Nicaragua (e.g.,
opment) party, during which time, according to V-DEM data, the country experienced the
after more than 20 years of rule by Recep Tayyip Erdog̃an and his AKP (Justice and Devel-
important election of 2023” and crucial for “the future of democracy.” The election came 1
rounds of) presidential elections, which The Economist Magazine described as the “most
We investigate these issues in the context of Türkiye’s May 2023 parliamentary and (two
hold misperceived beliefs about the state and the utility of democracy in their country.
even chaos (as in China or Türkiye). This raises the possibility that the population may
in Russia, Hungary or India today) or often argue that democracy would bring gridlock or
order to convince their populations that they are more democratic than they truly are (as
regimes also control the media, repress dissent and use rigged elections and propaganda in
Huntington [1997], Gessen [2017], Mitter and Johnson [2021]). Yet, many authoritarian
is often invoked in explaining why democracy will not take root in China or Russia (e.g.,
world by lack of true demand for democracy within their populations. This perspective
they deserve], explains enduring authoritarian governments in many countries around the
statement, “Toute nation a le gouvernement qu’elle mérite” [Nations get the government
A view pithily summarized by the French conservative philosopher Joseph de Maistre’s 1857
1 Introduction

2
both the high-credibility and the basic informational treatments.
thus our study did not add further partisan language or canvassing strategies. We evaluate the effects of
note that this is a version of what our partners were planning to implement without our involvement, and
The second, which we call the basic informational treatment, includes more partisan language. However, 3
or free media) and aligns their perceptions of the evolution of institutions with reality. It
mational treatment increases the subjects’ beliefs in the value of the institutions (democracy
significant effects from the informational treatments. Online, we find that the bundled infor-
Our results in the two experiments consistently support the latter hypothesis and show
for democracy and possible support for authoritarian leaders.
that various types of misperceptions and inaccurate information are influencing the demand
respond to our informational treatments, this would be evidence in favor of the hypothesis
intentions (in the online experiment) and voters’ actual choices (in the field experiment)
from greater democracy or media freedom. Alternatively, if participants’ beliefs and voting
either Turkish institutions are suﬀiciently democratic and/or there is not much to gain
care much about democratic institutions or have been firmly convinced by propaganda that
provide will be disregarded by Turkish voters—which would be evidence that they do not
The key questions of interest in our experiments concern whether the information we
credibility of the informational treatments.
tional cross-randomizations in order to study how the aﬀiliation of canvassers affected the
electoral data across ballot boxes to track actual voting outcomes. We also conducted addi-
factual and based on consensus views in current research. We then used administrative 3
at the level of neighborhoods and the first of these, our high-credibility treatment, is purely
two versions of our informational treatment by using door-to-door canvassing randomized
focus our treatments on factual information as much as possible. Specifically, we provided
ing parties from the governing coalitions did not accept to take part in our study, we tried to
to understand how each party defines and approaches democracy. Even though the two lead-
perceptions of democracy and media independence. We emphasized that our objective was
tially contacted all major parties and invited them to partner with us in a study about
Importantly, in our field experiment, we adopted a non-partisan approach, and we ini-
media treatments together.
exposition, for our main results in the online experiment, we bundle the democracy and
placebo treatments on self-reported individual beliefs and voting intentions. For ease of
for experimenter demand effects. We then investigated the effects of the information and
[2020], that contained encouragement but no actual information as a way of controlling
Online, we additionally provided a placebo treatment, designed as in Acemoglu et al.
in turn enabled by local and national corruption.
of the earthquake were greatly exacerbated because of unsafe building practices, which were

3
then increase their support and reduce the demand for democracy and media freedom. But
come partly self-fulfilling as long-ruling authoritarian regimes cement misperceptions which
et al. [2024]), our findings additionally suggest that misperceptions about democracy can be-
cessful performance by democratic governments builds support for democracy in (Acemoglu
any other, literature, to the best of our knowledge. Combined with the finding that suc-
partly malleable and can be impacted by accurate information has no equivalent in this, or
misperceptions and their assessment of the value of democracy and media freedom is at least
paigns can have significant effects by correcting these misconceptions. Our result that voter
of democratic institutions and free media, and then showing that simple information cam-
to this literature by first documenting systematic misperceptions about the state and value
ham and Svolik [2020], Persson and Tabellini [2009], Svolik [2023]). Our paper contributes
[2019], Dahlum et al. [2024], Finkel et al. [2024], Fuchs-Schundeln and Schundeln [2015], Gra-
the determinants of voters’ preferences for democratic institutions (e.g., Besley and Persson
Our study relates to three separate literatures. First, we build on research exploring
information, provided that they view it as credible.
notion that those leaning towards the incumbent coalition can respond to new and relevant
than aﬀiliates of the two main opposition parties, appear more credible, which supports the
interpretation, we also find that information provided by non-aﬀiliated canvassers, rather
misperceptions about democracy and its relevance to people’s lives. Consistent with this
results thus suggest that even simple informational treatments have the potential to change
misperceptions about the state and/or the utility of democracy and free media. These
estimates are larger for those who are supportive of the government and who have greater
exactly the opposite pattern: Online and in the field, there are no turnout effects and our
and further motivating those already sympathetic to the opposition. Interestingly, we find
state of democracy is healthy in Türkiye; they may instead impact averages by mobilizing
and voting intentions of those who are supporting the government and/or maintain that the
A natural conjecture is that informational treatments would have little effect on the views
round presidential election.
presidential election and similar effects in the parliamentary elections and in the second
share (corresponding to a 4.4 percent rise relative to the mean) in the first round of the
informational treatments—led to a 2.4 percentage point increase in the opposition’s vote
In the field experiment, the bundled treatment—combining the high-credibility and basic
significance.
placebo treatment are much smaller (about 0.5 percentage points) and far from statistical
(equivalent to a 6.2 percent increase relative to the mean). In contrast, the effects of the
also increases their likelihood of voting for the opposition by about 3.7 percentage points

4
and how this can be effective among voters that hold more misperceived beliefs or among
relatively simple, accurate information can partially correct misperceptions about democracy
with high-quality administrative data to evaluate experimental effects. It also pinpoints how
its focus on the support for democracy versus authoritarianism and because it combines this
air quality in Lahore, Pakistan. Our study is distinguished relative to this literature both by
provided by the government and by private citizens groups on their willingness to pay for
the US context, while Imtiaz et al. [2024] explore the effects of information on air quality
Afrouzi et al. [2024] estimate that leaders can influence individuals with their messages in
the opposition, thus further raising the electoral advantage of the incumbent government.
increased turnout in government strongholds, while decreasing it in areas leaning towards
campaign during the 2018 Bangladeshi general election and find that these interventions
and Ahmed et al. [2023] examine the effects of neutral information and a get-out-the-vote
policy information reduced self-reported support for a populist leader in the Philippines,
and Rozenas [2018]). Additionally, Cruz et al. [2024] find that door-to-door campaigns with
media can increase voter polarization (Adena et al. [2015], Enikolopov et al. [2023], Peisakhin
polarizing effect. A few other studies also find that information provided by the traditional
facto relaxation of President Erdog̃an’s term limits). She finds that this information had a
constitutional referendum (which proposed a transition to a presidential system and a de
a randomized door-to-door information campaign on voter behavior in the 2017 Turkish
related study by Baysan [2022] also uses administrative data to evaluate the impact of
et al. [2011, 2023], Knight and Tribin [2022], Peisakhin and Rozenas [2018]). The closely
in the context of weak democracies or authoritarian regimes (Adena et al. [2015], Enikolopov
Third, our study relates to the literature on the political economy of persuasion, especially
they transpire; this, too, has no equivalent in this literature, to the best of our knowledge.
administrative data both to establish these results and to explore the mechanisms via which
also leverage our online experiment and our work in the field combined with high-quality
democracy candidates in elections, even in the shadow of intensifying authoritarianism. We
and explores whether accurate and relevant information can rebuild support for more pro-
to this literature, our study focuses on misperceptions about democracy and free media
17 Latin American countries, complemented by a field experiment in Mexico. Relative
[2024] analyze over 170 high-profile corruption scandals involving leading politicians across
and Finan [2008], Larreguy et al. [2020], Rivera et al. [2024]). For example, Rivera et al.
voter preferences (e.g., Arias et al. [2022], Chong et al. [2015], Enríquez et al. [2024], Ferraz
Second, our paper is related to the literature on the impact of corruption scandals on
information.
our results also show that this cycle can be broken by accurate and impartially-presented

5
the collapse of all other center-right parties in Türkiye, and its survival from an attempt
[2019]). This coincided both with the party gaining supremacy over the center-right, with
AKP’s enthusiasm for economic opening and political reform waned (Acemoglu and Üçer
corruption efforts, and membership of the European Union. By the mid-2000s, however, the
military. It even pursued various reforms expanding religious and minority rights, anti-
accession to power and enthusiastically worked to curb the influence of the secular Turkish
The AKP initially supported economic and political reforms that had started before its
gaining more votes than any other party in all parliamentary elections over the last 22 years.
who became prime minister in 2003, have emerged as the dominant force in Turkish politics,
Since coming to power in 2002, the AKP, and its founding leader Recep Tayyip Erdog̃an
2.1 Institutional and Social Changes in Türkiye under AKP Rule
In this section, we provide a brief summary of the Turkish context before the 2023 elections.
2 Background
about the online and field experiments, including our survey instrument and figures.
checks. The Online Supplementary Material, available here, contains detailed information
Section 7 concludes. The Appendix presents additional data descriptions and robustness
field experiment. Section 6 discusses the potential mechanisms for our main findings, while
online experiment, while Section 5 turns to our main results, which are from the large-scale
2023 election. Section 3 describes our experiments. Section 4 discusses the results from our
basic context on the evolution of Turkish institutions over the last two decades and the
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We start in the next section with some
more directly critical of President Erdog̃an and his regime.
which included a call to oppose the constitutional change, may have been interpreted as
question of desirability of a strong executive, and also because the informational treatments,
may have been more polarized in the context of the 2017 referendum, especially on the
results in Baysan [2022] were perceived differently by voters, both because the population
with people with different baseline beliefs. In this light, it may be conjectured that the earlier
a non–partisan manner was important in communicating with government supporters and
on factual and research-based information and were, to the extent possible, presented in
et al. [2023] and Peisakhin and Rozenas [2018]). The fact that our treatments were based
of the information matters for whether it will have polarizing effects (see also Enikolopov
those that support the government. We suspect that the exact context and presentation

6
Unemployment rate data from the World Bank [accessed 31/8/2024] 5
CNBC article on Turkish Lira’s record low against the dollar [accessed 31/8/2024] 4
to remain in place. Even before the earthquake AKP censorship efforts had expanded, with
amnesty” which was promulgated by President Erdog̃an himself, allowing unsafe buildings
was a result of endemic local and national corruption, as well as a “building code violation
follow the building code, even in high earthquake-risk areas. It was also recognized that this
blamed the death toll and the destruction on tens of thousands of buildings that did not
largest seen in the region, with several powerful and disruptive aftershocks, the expert opinion
people and displacing more than a million. Although the earthquake itself was one of the
suffered a massive (7.8 magnitude) earthquake in February 2023, killing more than 50,000
In the midst of intensifying poverty and economic hardship, the south of the country
market. 5
January, 2023, even though many working-age Turks had already withdrawn from the labor
that economic growth was flailing and the oﬀicial unemployment rate reached about 10% in
rates and government spending initially stimulated the economy, but there were also signs
Turkish lira plummeted, losing 80% of its value between 2018 and 2023. Low interest 4
favored and imposed on the central bank by President Erdog̃an himself. Concurrently, the
higher), in part because of unorthodox economic policies centered on low interest rates
was indeed dire, with oﬀicial inflation exceeding 70% (and the unoﬀicial rate perhaps being
even some of Erdog̃an’s erstwhile allies had now turned against him. The economic situation
because discontent with AKP rule in some segments of the population was intensifying and
The 2023 parliamentary and presidential elections were seen as historic in Türkiye, in part
2.2 The 2023 Elections
freedom of expression, media freedom and dissent in Türkiye.
fall being in the liberal and the deliberative aspects, which partly reflects the erosion of the
same pattern can be seen in all subcomponents of the democracy score, with the sharpest
and democracy in Türkiye starts a precipitous decline thereafter. Panel B shows that the
scores predates AKP’s accession to power, but this is reversed sometime in the mid-2000s,
higher values indicating more democratic institutions. A trend towards higher democracy
Panel A, we show the evolution of the overall democracy index, ranging from 0 to 100, with
Figure 1 illustrates these trends using democracy scores from the V-DEM dataset. In
the opposition and independent media.
and adopted a more authoritarian agenda, launching a gradually intensifying crackdown on
leaders, including Erdog̃an. Around this time, Erdog̃an intensified his control over the party
by the military and secular elements of the bureaucracy to close it down and imprison its

7
then the leader of the Homeland Party, who withdrew from the race three days prior to
Two other candidates were Muharrem İnce, a former leading figure in the CHP and
the Nation Alliance candidate Kılıçdarog̃lu before the election.
alliance was not the main contender for the presidency and declared their support for
Party, which had been ruled eligible by the Supreme Election Council (YSK). This
the HDP decided to participate in the elections under the umbrella of the Green Left
the election approached and with the likelihood of being disbanded by the authorities,
People’s Democratic Party (HDP) and various other Kurdish and left-wing parties. As
3. The Labor and Freedom Alliance: This alliance was made up of the Kurdish
of the Nation Alliance was Kemal Kılıçdarog̃lu.
and Progress Party (DEVA) and the Future Party (GP). The presidential candidate
Party (DP), and two recent parties established by former AKP leaders, the Democracy
from the far-right MHP, the Islamist Felicity Party (SP), and the centre-right Democrat
alliance included the nationalist/center-right Good (İYİ) Party, which had split off
of the AKP period and the ruler of Türkiye during the early Republican years. The
Republican People’s Party (CHP), which had been the main opposition party for most
2. The Nation Alliance: This alliance was led by the main opposition, center-left
elections independently, but supported Erdog̃an in the presidential race.
the People’s Alliance was President Erdog̃an. The MHP contested the parliamentary
the Kurdish Islamist Free Cause Party (HÜDA-PAR). The presidential candidate of
such as the Great Unity Party (BBP), the Islamist New Welfare Party (YRP) and
formed in 2018, also included support from smaller right-wing and religious parties,
the far right the Nationalist Movement Party (MHP). The alliance, which initially
1. The People’s Alliance: This alliance comprised the ruling AKP and its partner,
blocs:
against the government. Consequently, the 2023 elections was fought between three electoral
was one of the factors leading to the formation of a broad coalition of opposition parties
the opposition started viewing the 2023 election as an opportunity to unseat Erdog̃an. This
the Turkish population, and the tragedy of the earthquake, many in civil society and within
practices of the governing party, growing unpopularity of Erdog̃an among some segments of
In the midst of deepening economic problems, intensifying reactions against corrupt
used to stop social media communications after the earthquake.
a 2022 law enabling the government to shut down all kinds of media outlets. The law was

8
The English version of the survey and additional details are available here. 6
we describe in greater detail below. Following the informational treatment, participants
randomly assigned to two treatment groups, two placebo groups, and a control group, which
the sample. A total of 5,161 respondents completed the baseline survey and were then
particular, those three standard deviations above or below the median) were excluded from
Participants who completed the baseline survey much faster or slower than the rest (in
characteristics, political and social views and baseline perceptions of Turkish institutions. 6
and endline questions. The baseline questions gathered information on socio-demographic
The survey comprised three parts: baseline questions, an (informational) intervention,
the survey.
chance to earn 2,000 Turkish Liras (equivalent to 100 USD at the time) upon completing
a consent form. Of these, 8,429 proceeded to start the survey. Participants were offered a
clicked on the ads and were redirected to the survey landing page, where they were offered
an online study about Turkish institutions via Facebook ads. A total of 19,151 individuals
Figure A-1. Between April 11 and May 27, 2023, we invited Turkish adults to participate in
Recruitment and Sample The design of the online experiment is outlined in Appendix
3.1 Online Experiment
experiments.
experiments. Appendix Table A-1 provides definitions for all the variables used in the two
in the field during April-May 2023. In this section, we describe the design of the two
state and implications of democracy and media freedom, and were carried out online and
Our study is centered on informational treatments providing accurate information on the
3 Experimental Design and Data
Erdog̃an won handily, with 52.5% of the vote.
vote, there was a second-round presidential election in two weeks time, which President
Kılıçdarog̃lu’s vote share of 44.9%. Because no candidate received more than 50% of the
a majority in the first-round of the presidential election, with 49.5% of the vote, against
Alliance got 212 seats with 35% of the vote. President Erdog̃an came very close to securing
majority in parliament with 49.5% of the vote and 323 of the 600 seats, while the Nation
Despite some pre-election polls favoring the opposition, the People’s Alliance gained a
Parliamentary elections and the first-round of the presidential elections were on May 14.
the election, and Sinan Og̃an, from the anti-immigration, nationalist Ancestral Alliance.

9
porting evidence showing the evolution of the relevant institution (media or democracy) over
Participants in the treatment groups could click a button to view supplementary sup-
racy has worsened in Türkiye in the last 30 years.”
of lives lost will decrease. Also, according to research, oﬀicial data shows that democ-
ens in a country, the number of buildings damaged by natural disasters and the number
• Democracy informational treatment: “According to research, as democracy strength-
in the last 30 years.”
shows that media independence has worsened and corruption has increased in Türkiye
in a country worsens, corruption increases. Also, according to research, oﬀicial data
• Media informational treatment: “According to research, as media independence
were:
independence and corruption. Based on this evidence, our two informational treatments
[2003], Ferraz and Finan [2008], Larreguy et al. [2020] on the relationship between media
the impact of natural disasters and from Besley and Burgess [2002], Brunetti and Weder
[2024], Kahn [2005] and on the relationships between institutional quality and mitigating
relevant metric, and in this case, we drew on evidence from Besley and Burgess [2002], Cao
credibility evidence on the relationship between the chosen dimension of institutions and the
and rule of law related outcomes). It was also important for our purposes that we have high-
Turkish voters (and did so more than other metrics, such as GDP growth rates, inflation
imental pilots, where we found that they were easily understandable to and resonated with
features and metrics were validated in focus groups, qualitative fieldwork, and online exper-
for success, dealing with natural disasters and controlling corruption. These institutional
dimensions of national institutions, democracy and media, and their effects on two metrics
under an authoritarian government. Given the salient issues in Türkiye, we focused on two
institutions in environments where the population has become less positive about democracy
substantive implications of institutions and, in this way, strengthen support for democratic
high-credibility, accurate information can alter misperceived beliefs about the state and
Informational Treatments As explained above, the main question of interest is whether
attrition in our online experiment.
sample for analysis. Appendix Figure A-2 shows that there is no evidence of differential
voting intentions. In total, 4,405 participants completed the endline survey, making up our
on perceptions of institutions and views towards political parties, as well as questions on
completed the endline survey, comprising the outcomes of interest as well as final questions

10
Additional details are available here. 7
pendence or democracy improvements leading to better outcomes or deteriorations leading
randomization between formulations that differed on whether they mentioned media inde-
Our design also included variations in how the information was presented, with cross-
to continue with the survey and complete the endline questions.
After the treatments, all participants, including those in the control group, were invited
30 years.”
decrease. Also, some people think that democracy has worsened in Türkiye in the last
number of buildings damaged by natural disasters and the number of lives lost will
few people said: Although I am not sure, I think that, as democracy strengthens, the
• Democracy placebo treatment: “We talked to voters in Türkiye recently and a
worsened and corruption has increased in Türkiye in the last 30 years.”
worsens, corruption increases. Also, some people think that media independence has
people said: Although I am not sure, I think that, as media independence in a country
• Media placebo treatment: “We talked to voters in Türkiye recently and a few
worded as:
placebo treatments can be used to net out such demand effects. In our study, these were
extent of experimenter demand effects and the difference between the informational and the
information effects. If so, whether they are significant or not will provide evidence on the
placebo treatments should then create the same experimenter demand effects, but no true
information and instead contain the views of the experimenters as subjective opinions. These
Acemoglu et al. [2020] and construct two placebo treatments that do not contain any actual
freedom and democracy have become worse in Türkiye. To deal with this issue, we follow
in the treatments, but to their own perception that we would like them to say that media
formational treatments, the concern is that they may be responding not to the information
think the experimenters would like to hear. In the case of our media and democracy in-
fects” whereby subjects may feel encouraged to provide answers that align with what they
treatments. Specifically, this approach is motivated by possible “experimenter demand ef-
not receive any informational treatment, and two placebo groups, which received placebo
In addition to the two informational treatments, we had a control group which did
to click the button and view this supplementary information.
on the effects of natural disasters. In our experiments, 42.8% of the treated sample opted
7
outcome in the democracy informational treatment, since we do not have time-series data
metrics, corruption, over the same years in Türkiye, but could not do so for the relevant
the years 1990, 2000, 2010, and 2022. We also presented the evolution of one of our outcome

11
introduced our research team, outlined the study’s objectives, and requested a meeting to
Türkiye’s three largest provinces, Ankara, Istanbul, and Izmir. Our communications briefly
follow-ups—to both the general secretary of each party and the principal local contacts in
study. We directed our communications—an initial invitation email and two subsequent
represented in parliament, AKP, CHP, HDP, İYİ Party, and MHP, to participate in our
Recruitment and Sample In December 2022, we extended invitations to the five parties
3.2 Field Experiment
pendix Table A-3.
We also collected a battery of individual-level demographic variables, as detailed in Ap-
(3) intentions of voting for the opposition.
(2) turnout intentions.
deviation units.
per we standardized these two perception variables, so magnitudes always refer to standard
be better today (April-May, 2023) than they were in 2000. Throughout the rest of the pa-
five-point scales that assess the extent to which both media and democracy are perceived to
tution has evolved in Türkiye. This variable is constructed by taking the average of two
variable is State of Institutions, which measures perceptions about how the relevant insti-
reduce the number of people affected by natural disasters in the future.” The second belief
try will reduce corruption in the future” and “Strengthening democracy in a country will
level of agreement with the following statements: “Increasing media independence in a coun-
This variable is constructed by averaging two seven-point scales, assessing the respondents’
individuals believe that democratic institutions are important for achieving better outcomes.
variables. The first, which we call Valuation of Institutions, measures the extent to which
effective responses to natural disasters). Specifically, we constructed two key perception
impact of freedom of media on the control of corruption and the impact of democracy on
in democracy or media freedom since 2000) and the effectiveness of these institutions (the
(1) beliefs about the state of institutions (in particular, individual perceptions on changes
in the baseline and endline surveys. These are:
Outcome Variables We collected our main outcome variables for our online experiment
results from different cross-randomizations only in the Appendix (see Appendix Table A-2).
framings for our main outcomes of interest, motivating us to describe the details and the
to worse outcomes. At the end, we do not find major differences between these different

12
minimize random imbalances, following the approach outlined by Banerjee et al. [2017].
For each treatment group, we chose a well-balanced sample from 100,000 possible re-randomizations to 9
Additional details are available here. 8
and a control group. The first informational treatment, which we call high-credibility infor-
tion. The key dimension of our randomization was between two informational treatments
Treatments To simplify the field experiment, we focused on media freedom and corrup-
See Appendix Table A-4 for details.
neighborhoods contained 404,862 voters according to our 2018 parliamentary election rolls.
out of which 252 were randomly selected as treatment neighborhoods. These treatment 9
number of voters. We ended up with a final experimental sample of 554 neighborhoods,
too remote or that would require more time that our canvassers had for visiting a suﬀicient
June 24, 2018 parliamentary election to exclude from our sample neighborhoods that were
as other cross-randomization, were at the neighborhood level, and we used data from the
Randomization between different informational treatments and the control group, as well
and provided canvassers with an optimized route to follow.
facilitate more eﬀicient canvassing, we also geocoded each street within the neighborhoods
tions, instances where doors were not opened, or rejections after the door was opened. To
their interactions with each household, noting completed conversations, pamphlet distribu-
when conversations were not completed (e.g., when no one was at home). Canvassers logged
we describe below. Canvassers were instructed to leave a pamphlet behind the door even
content was guided by pamphlets that varied according to the treatment assignment, which
provided by the campaign managers and role-played during the training. The conversation
not rush to the next door if the voter wanted to continue the conversation. This protocol was
immediately if the voter wanted them to. In addition, they were told to listen carefully and
were told to politely present the information, not be persuasive, and to end the conversation
brief conversation during which the relevant informational treatment was delivered. They
adult member of the household. After introducing themselves, the canvassers initiated a
All canvassers were instructed to knock on each door and deliver the information to an
to these as non-aﬀiliated canvassers.
vassers were asked to work with a civic, non-partisan organization, SahadaBiriz, and we refer
techniques for engaging with voters and relevant information on the campaign. Some can-
derwent training organized by their own party and received uniform instructions on basic
To ensure uniformity in the campaign across different neighborhoods, all canvassers un-
province, in collaboration with these two parties, between April 14 and May 12 of 2023.
the door-to-door information campaigns were administered in Izmir, Türkiye’s third-largest
further discuss the study’s nature. CHP and the İYİ Party responded to our invitation and 8

13
Let’s protect democracy together.
Become a partner in our demand for transparency in Türkiye.
To fight corruption, today is the time for change.
Say no to corruption, look to the future with hope.
Transparency and accountability are the foundation for a better future.
One of Türkiye’s biggest problems is corruption.
• Basic informational treatment:
in the left column of Appendix Figure A-3.
this treatment, separately for non-aﬀiliated, CHP and İYİ Party canvassers, are presented
pendence and corruption for 1990, 2000, 2010, and 2022 from V-DEM. The pamphlets for
in Türkiye over a 30-year period and showed a figure illustrating the indices of media inde-
The pamphlet also depicted the decline of media independence and the rise of corruption
Türkiye in the last 30 years.
Oﬀicial data show that media neutrality and independence have declined rapidly in
from the public, making it easier to hide corruption.
When the media does not report on corruption, real and accurate information is hidden
Researchers state that as media independence worsens, corruption increases.
the public.
that unbiased and independent media are critical in providing accurate information to
Impartial and independent media play a vital role in democracies. Researchers state
• High-credibility informational treatment:
The exact texts for these two treatments were:
main results.
randomization will feature in our interpretations and discussions, but is not central to our
either the CHP, or the İYİ Party, or non-aﬀiliated canvassers. This second dimension of
In addition, we also cross-randomized according to the identity of the canvassers—from
These two treatments had their own separate pamphlets that were shared with households.
and corruption. It contained a call to action, consistent with the opposition parties’ agenda.
ment, which used less impartial and more concrete/evocative language about media freedom
we had on the basis of research articles. We also implemented a basic informational treat-
mational treatment, aimed at providing in an impartial manner the most credible information

14
explains our choice of conducting the randomization at the neighborhood level.
ballot boxes were located at the same address and we can only observe their exact location in 2023. This
Although we have data at the ballot-box level, we cannot track ballot boxes over time, because multiple 10
treatment separately.
and democracy placebo treatments are also bundled. We later study the effects of each
whereby the media and democracy informational treatments are combined, and the media
To simplify the exposition and maximize statistical power, we start with bundled treatments,
4.1 Empirical Strategy for Online Experiment
mechanisms combining data from both online and field experiments in Section 6.
online experiment. In the next section, we turn to the field experiment, and then discuss
In this section, we discuss our empirical strategy and present the headline results from the
4 Results from the Online Experiment
of the Turkish Supreme Election Council. 10
trative data on ballot box-level vote shares and turnout, which we obtained from the website
Outcome Variables In the field experiment, our outcome variables come from adminis-
local partners.
voters to understand and can also motivate them to turn out, which was a priority for our
first contains higher-quality, more impartial information, while the second may be easier for
Ex ante, we were unsure about which of the two treatments would be more effective. The
voters and actual vote shares would have occurred without our study.
or less at the same scale without our involvement, and hence, we believe that its effects on
informational treatment, our interpretation is that this would have been implemented more
of placebo treatment. Although we worked with them in the exact wording of the basic
but allowed us to add our high-credibility treatment. They also did not agree to any type
campaigns and the parties that agreed to our study chose to keep their pre-existing plans,
and government coalition parties, our invitation did not require them to discontinue their
to carry out a similar door-to-door campaign. So in order to convince both opposition
The basic informational treatment is included in part because all parties were intending
to bottom, non-aﬀiliated, CHP, and İYİ, respectively.
canvassers, are presented on the right of Appendix Figure A-3, which corresponds, from top
The pamphlet for this treatment, again separately for non-aﬀiliated, CHP and İYİ Party

15
may still matter for our estimates and we explore this issue in our robustness analysis.
whether we control for some of these statistically insignificant pre-treatment characteristics
We emphasize, however, that despite the lack of major imbalances given our sample size,
show differences at the 10% level, which is consistent with sampling variation.
statistical differences at the 5% level between treatment and control groups, and only five
ceived level of institutions in 2023 and fighting inflation as a top government priority) show
our groups appear relatively well balanced. Out of the 56 tests for balance, only two (per-
iment, some imbalance in pre-treatment characteristics is expected. On the whole, however,
and 907 in the control group. Given the limited number of participants in this online exper-
treatment, 848 for the media placebo treatment, 904 for the democracy placebo treatment,
participants for the media informational treatment, 869 for the democracy informational
characteristics in the online experiment. We have 4,405 participants, separated between 877
variables and Appendix Table A-3 presents summary statistics and balance tests for baseline
Panel A of Appendix Table A-5 provides summary statistics for the main post-treatment
4.2 Summary Statistics and Balance
different.
to the control group. We also report p-values for the treatment and the placebo effects being
β θ group is always omitted, the coeﬀicients and give us the average treatment effects relative
be heteroscedastic and report robust standard errors in all regressions. Because the control
i
ε as covariates. The error term proxies for all omitted characteristics, and we allow it to
i
X treatments. In addition, is a vector of pre-treatment characteristics, which we include
i i
T P combined, the variables and are dummies for (bundled) informational and placebo
treatments. In our main specification, because the media and democracy treatments are
i i
T P The key right-hand side variables, and , are dummies for informational and placebo
about state of institutions, valuation of institutions, voting intentions and turnout intentions.
i
Y i—self-reported
where represents one of our outcomes of interest for individual beliefs
i i i i i
Y = π + βT + θP + X γ + ε ,
(1)
′
effects are from the following OLS model:
Throughout the online experiment, all comparisons are between individuals, and reported
control groups, as we describe in the next section.
because there are some minor imbalances in pre-treatment covariates between treatment and
than a comparison of means, we do this by running ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions,
Throughout, we present average treatment effects by different types of treatments. Rather

16
media freedom in the field are very similar to those we report from our online experiment.
differences between the views of government and opposition supporters on the evolution of democracy and
to use these data for studying the effects of informational treatments, Appendix Figure A-7 shows that
to participate, and newly sampled voters also declined to take part. Although we are consequently unable
However, after the elections, nearly all of those who had agreed to the baseline survey no longer wanted
We also conducted a baseline survey of a randomly-selected subset of voters in the field experiment. 12
pre-treatment voting intentions in our sample, and shows that they are closely aligned.
Appendix Figure A-4 compares vote shares from the 2018 parliamentary election with the self-reported, 11
independence and democracy scores. 12
while the views of opposition supporters are broadly in line with the actual decline in media
V-DEM data as ground truth, they are holding significantly more misperceived opinions,
vorable opinion of how media independence and democracy have evolved, and if we take
that emerges is quite clear: supporters of the governing coalition have a much more fa-
We represent the actual change in the V-DEM dataset by the dashed line. The pattern
2000 and 2022 (see also Appendix Figure A-6 for the levels in 2000 and 2022 separately).
in media independence, while the right panel is for perceived changes in democracy between
pendence and democracy have evolved in Türkiye. The left panel depicts perceived changes
Panel B of Figure 2 shows summary statistics on voters’ perceptions of how media inde-
one relative to government coalition supporters.
supporters are also more likely to support a democratic government over an authoritarian
3, which is measured at the endline). Relatedly, Appendix Figure A-5 shows that opposition
also have significantly different valuation of institutions (using the index described in Section
towards democracy). On the right, we see that government supporters in the control group
in 2018 (this is the question we use in the baseline survey for measuring their attitudes
democracy than are those who supported the other two coalitions or those who did not vote
coalition in 2018 are much more likely to report that autocracy is sometimes preferable to
Panel A of Figure 2 shows, on the left, that participants who voted for the governing
in dark blue; and HDP, shown in grey. 11
and MHP), shown consistently in yellow; the Nation Alliance (CHP and İYİ Party), shown
supporting the three blocs with representation in parliament: the People’s Alliance (AKP
experimental results. In this subsection, we summarize these results, focusing on voters
parties on the state and valuation of institutions, which will be helpful in interpreting our
Our online experiment also enables us to measure the baseline views of supporters of different
4.3 Voters’ Baseline Views

17
state of institutions.
50%) of the difference in how individuals with and without tertiary education perceive the
in terms of quantitative magnitudes, we also find that our treatment effect is half (exactly
bundled treatment, and they are a little less precise for the democracy treatment. Likewise,
the media treatments, the results and their statistical significance are very similar to the
are also similar when we separate the media and democracy treatments. Specifically, with
than 1%, and statistically distinguishable from the placebo effect at about 1%. The results
have changed since 2000; this effect is statistically different from the control mean at less
of 6.8% of one standard deviation in perceived beliefs about how the state of institutions
On the right, we see a very similar pattern. The informational treatment leads to a decline
cation and those who did not.
valuation of institutions between individuals in our control group who reached tertiary edu-
group and the control group is sizable—approximately half (58%) of the difference in the
In terms of quantitative magnitudes, the difference between the informational treatment
since the gain in statistical power obtained by combining the two experiments is lost.
democracy treatments, the pattern is similar, though the results are slightly less precise,
informational and the placebo treatments are equal. When we separate the media and the
control group and the placebo treatment. Moreover, we can comfortably reject that the
groups; this difference is statistically significant at 4%. There is no difference between the
deviation in the valuation of institutions between the informational treatment and the control
of the respondents. In the bundled treatment, there is a difference of 6.5% of a standard
We see clearly that informational treatments have led to a significant change in the beliefs
Figure 3, which presents the main takeaways in the most transparent manner.
The point estimates are also reported in Tables 1 and A-6. In this subsection we focus on
and the informational treatment effects being statistically distinguishable from each other.
from the control group’s beliefs, and at the top we also report the p-value for the placebo
deviation confidence intervals and p-values for these estimates being statistically different
effects between media and democracy treatments. In each case, we provide the two standard
treatment (in blue), and subsequently we separate the placebo and informational treatment
we present the bundled treatment effects for the placebo (in green) and the informational
of these outcomes). In both panels, we first show the average for the control group, then
Figure A-8 additionally reports treatment effects on the two components that make up each
the valuation of institutions, while the right part is for the state of institutions (Appendix
The main results are presented in Panel A of Figure 3. The left part of Panel A is for
We now report the experimental estimates of the informational treatments on voter beliefs.
4.4 Experimental Results: Voter Beliefs

18
quite significant.
willing to vote for opposition parties, and the results are quantitatively and statistically
reported beliefs about the state and valuation of institutions, but also makes them more
Overall, we estimate that the informational treatment not only changes people’s self-
treatment. We return to the interpretation of this finding in Section 6.
intentions, and in this case, we do not find statistically significant effects of the informational
The right-hand side of Panel B of Figure 3 also shows the results for self-reported turnout
stronghold) and cities such as Konya and Kayseri, which are government strongholds.
difference between İzmir (the city where our field experiment takes place and an opposition
mational treatment and control groups is approximately 10% of the opposition vote share
The quantitative magnitudes are again substantial. The difference between the infor-
the control group and the placebo treatments as well.
have enough statistical power to statistically distinguish informational treatments from both
the media and democracy treatments, we find very similar patterns, and in this case, we
informational and placebo treatments, as shown in Panel B of Figure 3. When we separate
effects are statistically significant at less than 1%, and so is the difference between the
placebo treatments is quite substantial—3.2 percentage points. The informational treatment
small and statistically insignificant coeﬀicient, and the gap between the informational and the
by 3.7 percentage points relative to the control group. The placebo treatment has a very
The bundled treatment is found to increase the probability of voting for the opposition
results and variations are also shown in Panel C of Table 1 and Appendix Table A-6.
self-reported voting intentions, using exactly the same structure as in Panel A. The same
Panel B of Figure 3 shows the impact of the informational and placebo treatments on the
4.5 Experimental Results: Voting
experimental results are driven by the informational content of the treatment.
which did not include high-credibility information, bolstering our interpretation that these
authoritarian leader. Notably, we do not find the same pattern with the placebo treatments
how beneficial democratic institutions are and how much they have been eroded under an
interpret these results as informational treatments correcting voter misperceptions about
is towards what we interpret as ground truth from the V-DEM data, and thus we can
and about how institutions have evolved in Türkiye since 2000. The direction of change
changed voters’ self-reported beliefs both about the valuation (effectiveness) of institutions
Overall, the high-credibility (and accurate) information we provide online appears to have

19
ferent neighborhoods have varying proportions of treated households. This leads to the
neighborhoods and are instrumented by our randomization assignment. Consequently, dif-
estimates refer to the effect of completed conversations with canvassers, which vary across
In our field experiment, we estimate the causal effects at the ballot-box level. Our main
5.1 Empirical Strategy
before proceeding to our main results.
is now at the neighborhood level. We then turn to descriptive statistics and balance tests,
empirical strategy, which is different from the one in the online experiment, since treatment
In this section we discuss our main results from the field experiment. We start with our
5 Main Results: Field Experiment
administrative data, thus rectifying this concern.
next turn to our main results, which are from a large-scale field experiment combined with
weakness of the online experiment is that all of the outcome variables are self-reported. We
demand effects—since we do not see similar impacts from the placebo treatments. The
reflect people’s response to new information—rather than their responses to experimenter
ments on beliefs and self-reported voting intentions. Our results are suggestive that these
In summary, the online experiment shows powerful effects from the informational treat-
the placebo treatment effects.
the same direction as in Figure 3 and statistically different from both the control group and
for pre-treatment outcome variables. In all cases, the informational treatment remains in
characteristics, this makes no further difference relative to the specification that controls just
ances between the treatment and control groups and/or when we control for all pre-treatment
regression. When we additionally include pre-treatment characteristics which show imbal-
control for the pre-treatment values of the dependent variables on the right-hand side of the
though the magnitudes of the informational treatment become somewhat smaller when we
Table 1, we see that varying the control set does not have a major impact on the results,
size of our online sample, even insignificant differences could have effects on estimates. In
between the treatment and control groups in our online experiment and, given the limited
to the set of controls, since, as already noted, there are a few variables that show imbalances
The results reported so far are quite robust. One important dimension of robustness pertains
4.6 Robustness

20
groups (sextiles) and stratifying the randomization by sextile.
We constructed these fixed effects by dividing the full range of opposition vote shares into six equal-sized 14
with just neighborhood-level controls in the Online Supplementary Material, which are very similar.
include more granular controls on the right-hand side and present the results from alternative specifications
unsure whether ballot box-level data would be available. Since we have gained access to these data, we now
Our pre-analysis plan specified that we would control for neighborhood-level variables because we were
13
we do not have a placebo treatment, but given that the outcome is actual voting behavior,
fications, we also separate these two different types of treatments. In the field experiment,
giving us an analogue of the bundled treatment in the previous section, but in later speci-
cation, the high-credibility and basic informational treatments are combined together, thus
dummies for different types of treatments at the neighborhood level. In our simpler specifi-
n
C We estimate equation (2) with two-stage least squares (2SLS), instrumenting for with
and are very similar).
of actual voters at the ballot-box level are provided in the Online Supplementary Material
voters, we report unweighted regressions (results from regressions weighted by the number
of neighborhoods. Because ballots boxes essentially contain the same number of registered
we report standard errors that are robust against heteroscedasticity clustered at the level
b n.
box in neighborhood Because randomization was at the neighborhood level, throughout
bn
u
denotes an error term capturing all omitted factors influencing voting outcomes at ballot
Robustness checks with different sets of controls are reported in Table 2 below. Finally,
the sextiles of the 2018 vote share for the opposition alliance. 14
voters), as well as dummies for different regions and strata fixed effects, which are based on
controls from the 2018 election (opposition’s vote share, turnout, and number of registered
temperature, ruggedness, distance to Istanbul, and distance to the coast), neighborhood-level
at each ballot box in 2023, ballot-box geographic controls (population density, precipitation,
include the following variables in the vector of controls: the number of registered voters 13
for in our specifications. In the baseline specification, we follow our pre-analysis plan and
bn
X The vector represents various ballot box and neighborhood characteristics we control
tion.
and basic informational treatments, as described above and discussed again later in this sec-
pleted informational treatments. We also sometimes distinguish between the high-credibility
n
C n
variable, , measures the fraction of households in neighborhood that have received com-
ample, the vote share of different parties or presidential candidates. The key right-hand side
bn
Y b n,
where is the outcome of interest at the level of ballot box in neighborhood for ex-
bn
bn n bn
Y = α + γC + X κ + u , (2)
′
following estimation equation

21
tatively and statistically, are very similar in the second-round presidential election and in the
rejects the hypothesis that the bundled treatment effects are zero. The results, both quanti-
to a 4.4 percent increase relative to the control mean). A standard Wald test comfortably
tion’s vote share in the first-round presidential election by 2.4 percentage points (equivalent
substantive effect on opposition vote shares. The bundled treatment increases the opposi-
iment results, the informational treatment has a statistically significant and quantitatively
The patterns from our field experiment are very clear. Analogously with our online exper-
same results are also shown in Table 2.
looks at longer-term effects by estimating the impact on the 2024 municipal elections. The
elections and the parliamentary elections. Panel B shows turnout effects, while Panel C
treatments on the opposition vote shares in the first-round and second-round presidential
Our main results are reported in Figure 4. Panel A displays the effects of the bundled
5.3 Main Results from the Field Experiment
of canvassers. Our 2SLS estimates take care of these differences in completion rates.
largely driven by the capacity constraints faced by İYİ Party, which had a smaller number
iation, with non-aﬀiliated canvassers having the highest completion rate. This difference is
informational treatment, but they do appear to be significantly different by canvasser aﬀil-
differed systematically between the high-credibility informational treatment and the basic
tributing the pamphlets to households. There is also no evidence that completion rates
percent of visits resulted in canvassers successfully completing the conversations and dis-
First stages for completion rates are reported in Appendix Table A-8. On average, 35
vote shares does not have a major impact on our results.
these are nontrivial differences and we confirm later in this section that controlling for 2018
control group. Though far from statistical significance (p-value for joint significance is 0.28),
control group and one percentage points higher in the basic treatment group than in the
vote share is two percentage points lower in the high-credibility treatment group than in the
of any statistically significant imbalances in any of our variables, but the 2018 opposition
balance tests for the field experiment based on the baseline covariates. There is no evidence
variables in the field experiment and Appendix Table A-7 presents summary statistics and
Panel B of Appendix Table A-5 provides summary statistics for the main post-treatment
5.2 Summary Statistics, Balance and Compliance
already seen that they are not that important in the online experiment.
experimenter demand effects are less likely to be important in this context and we have

22
Appendix Table A-9 probes the robustness of our results when we separate high-credibility
our pre-analysis plan.
is what motivated our main specification including the vote shares in 2018, as indicated in
though they become more precise because vote shares are very persistent over time, which
the field experiment, varying the set of covariates has essentially no effect on the estimates,
Table 2 presents the same results as in Figure 4 with different controls. It shows that, in
5.4 Robustness
to an interpretation of this dimension of heterogeneity in the next section.
greater credibility to non-aﬀiliated canvassers and the information they provide. We return
typically not statistically significant. This is quite plausible, since some voters will attach
canvassers than to those aﬀiliated with the opposition parties, though the differences are
The second important finding in Figure 5 is that voters respond more to non-aﬀiliated
types of voters, the two treatments give relatively comparable average effects.
information, which also has some sloganeering element. When averaged out across different
but, on the other hand, a larger fraction of voters may understand and respond to basic
are not able to further verify, is that some voters respond more to high-quality information,
statistically significant. One possible interpretation, which we find ex ante plausible but
formational treatment, but the differences with the basic informational treatments are not
aways are as follows. First, voters are slightly more responsive to the high-credibility in-
separately and also depicts heterogeneous effects by canvasser aﬀiliation. The main take-
Figure 5 presents the effects of the high-credibility and basic informational treatments
also shows that there are no turnout effects in the 2024 municipal elections.
some voters suﬀiciently to alter their long-term allegiances and/or voting patterns. Table 2
a surprising and noteworthy result as it suggests that accurate information may have swayed
a year after our experiment. Though the estimated effect is only marginally significant, it is
informational treatment on the opposition’s vote share in the 2024 municipal elections, about
Interestingly, in Panel C, we see a marginally significant positive effect from the bundled
A are not driven by differential increases in turnouts in some neighborhoods.
online voting intention results. This means, in particular, that the vote share results in Panel
Panel B, on the other hand, shows no impact on turnout, which is consistent with the
Konya and Kayseri.
opposition vote share in the opposition stronghold Izmir and the government strongholds,
results, the 2.4 percentage point impact is about 6% of the average difference between the
parliamentary election. In particular, using the same benchmark as in our online experiment

23
To start with, recall that we find no turnout effects either in the online or the field
coalition.
the state of Turkish institutions and who were previously more likely to support the governing
accurate informational treatments convinced voters who had greater misperceptions about
In this section, we argue that the results presented so far are driven in large part because our
6 Mechanisms
support for more pro-democratic parties (or reduce support for authoritarian incumbents).
tions as well as about the state of institutions under authoritarian leaders, it can bolster
information corrects misperceptions about the valuation/effectiveness of democratic institu-
fronted with accurate information, voters can change their votes, and to the extent that this
In sum, our field experiment provides strong support for the hypothesis that, when con-
regressor is defined does not change the main conclusions of our analysis.
turnout. Overall, the results in these tables show that the exact way in which the endogenous
pamphlet. Likewise, Appendix Table A-11 presents analogous robustness checks focusing on
a conversation was not initiated, so in our sample 79.5% of treated households received a
form estimates in Panel B, because canvassers were instructed to leave a pamphlet even if
prematurely after initiation. In Panel D, the point estimates are very similar to the reduced-
those in Panel A, because only a negligible fraction of conversations (about 0.1%) were ended
when we use initiated conversations as the key right-hand side variable, are nearly identical to
treatment effects are statistically significant in all panels. The point estimates in Panel C,
with canvassers and the fraction of pamphlets left as the endogenous regressor. Overall, the
C and D report the 2SLS results with, respectively, the fraction of initiated conversations
variable (as in Panel A of Table 2). Panel B presents our reduced-form estimates. Panels
the fraction of completed conversations with canvassers as the endogenous right-hand side
of the endogenous variable. For reference, Panel A starts with our main specification, with
Appendix Table A-10 explores the robustness of our main results to varying the definition
significant and the overall picture that emerges is very similar across specifications.
are again more reliable. In any case, the informational treatments are always statistically
difference, we believe that the estimates that control for the opposition vote share in 2018
is due to the differences in the opposition vote share in 2018, noted above, and given this
treatment is higher when we only include strata fixed effects (columns 1, 4, 7 and 10). This
that the magnitude of the high-credibility treatment effect is lower and that of the basic
vasser aﬀiliation. The results are very similar to our baseline estimates, with the exception
and basic informational treatments and also when we allow for heterogeneous effects by can-

24
treatments separately.
Appendix Figure A-12 show the heterogeneous effects for the high credibility and basic informational
16
those who self-reported voting for or against the governing coalition in 2018.
were neutral or favorable towards authoritarianism versus those who were unfavorable, and also between
Appendix Figures A-9 and A-10 show similar patterns by separating participants between those who 15
same effects are only 1.2 and 0.7 percentage points in Panel B.
and second-round presidential elections by 3.8 and 4.2 percentage points, respectively, the
A, while the informational treatment increases the opposition’s vote share in the first-round
smaller and far from statistical significance in the bottom panel. For example, in Panel 16
election is significant at 10%. In contrast, the impact of the informational treatment is much
presidential election are also statistically significant at 5% and the one for the parliamentary
elections are much larger than in the bottom panel. The effects for the two rounds of the
neighborhoods in the top panel, where the informational treatment effects in all three 2023
Table A-13). The pattern is quite clear: our field experiment results are driven by the
share was above the median in 2018 (the exact point estimates are presented in Appendix
the governing coalition. The bottom panel is for neighborhoods where the opposition’s vote
opposition was below median—which can broadly be thought of as neighborhoods supporting
at the neighborhood level. The top panel is for neighborhoods where the vote share of the
heterogeneous effects by the vote share of the opposition in the 2018 parliamentary election
We find the same general pattern in our field experiment. In particular, Figure 7 shows
point estimates are presented in Appendix Table A-12). 15
three outcome variables from the informational treatment in the bottom panel (the exact
In contrast to this pattern, we do not detect any positive effects on either one of our
treatment in this top panel.
we do not see a quantitatively important or statistically significant effect from the placebo
consequence of the accurate, high-credibility information is also bolstered by the fact that
and then became more likely to vote for the opposition. The interpretation that this is a
changed their valuation of institutions and their assessment of the state of institutions,
participants in the top panel. These are the people who, after the informational treatment,
deterioration of institutional quality. The figure demonstrates that our results are driven by
bottom panel presents the results for those who overestimated or accurately estimated the
for those who underestimated the deterioration of institutional quality at baseline, while the
institutional quality from 2000 to today (April-May, 2023). The top panel displays the results
respondents in the online experiment overestimated or underestimated the deterioration of
More directly, Figure 6 presents the heterogeneous treatment effects based on whether
likely on the basis of this finding.
experiments. Hence, a simple story based on mobilizing opposition voters already looks less

25
discouraged from participation or may simply lose interest in politics (e.g., Croke et al.
[2002]). Related to this second perspective, citizens under authoritarian regimes may be
(e.g., Esberg [2021], Guriev and Treisman [2022], King et al. [2013], McMillan and Zoido
authoritarian regimes in their ability to use propaganda, misinformation and social control
Huntington [1997], Mitter and Johnson [2021]). The second instead sees the durability of
demand, or at the very least do not fight for, democratic institutions (e.g., Gessen [2017],
that many cultures around the world do not value democracy and hence their peoples do not
Two sets of ideas have emerged as popular bookends in these debates. The first claims
(Freedom House [2023]). Social science is still at a loss in explaining these sweeping trends.
around the world has exceeded the number of those improving their democratic institutions
Freedom House, every year since 2006 the number of countries moving away from democracy
simply, the victory of liberal capitalism (e.g., Fukuyama [1989], Sen [1999]). According to the
salization of Western liberal democracy as the final form of human government”—or more
history” predicting the “the end point of mankind’s ideological evolution and the univer-
itarian regimes around the world, in stark contrast to perspectives rooted in the “end of
The last two decades have witnessed increasing resilience and durability of several author-
7 Conclusion
aﬀiliated with the opposition parties.
likely to be swayed when the information about the state of institutions came from canvassers
and our interpretation of this heterogeneous effect is that government supporters were less
fact that non-aﬀiliated canvassers had bigger impacts suggests that credibility still matters,
information and how and by whom it was delivered are unimportant. On the contrary, the
in the field. It is worth noting, however, that this does not mean that the credibility of the
information do not believe it. In our case, this seems not to have happened either online or
of a party further polarizes voters because supporters of the party disfavored by the new
voters. It also contrasts with other settings in which new information about the performance
and high-quality information can bridge gaps between ideologically divided communities of
If this is indeed the correct mechanism, it points to a hopeful interpretation—accurate
outcomes desired by the population.
the state of democratic institutions in Türkiye or their effectiveness in delivering policies and
ments had a bigger impact on those that had more misperceived baseline beliefs about either
porters. Second, and partially as a result of the first observation, the informational treat-
treatments were viewed as credible, including by a significant fraction of government sup-
These results therefore suggest two noteworthy conclusions. First, our informational

26
the same information provided by non-aﬀiliated (independent) canvassers is more effective.
consistent with the notion that the credibility of the information matters, since we find that
and by votes in neighborhoods leaning towards the governing coalition. Our results are
results are mostly explained by the responses of voters that have more misperceived beliefs
government. We found the opposite. There are no turnout effects, and more importantly, our
that were already leaning towards the opposition—or were for other reasons critical of the
information may further polarize the electorate and any benefits come from mobilizing voters
Equally remarkable are our results on mechanisms. One may be worried that this type of
rather than to experimenter demand effects.
Our online experiment also enabled us to show that voters responded to actual information
for the opposition by a 2.4 percentage points (4.4 percent relative to the control mean).
mational treatment at the neighborhood level increased the fraction of the electorate voting
about 50 percent of 885,000 registered voters in the third-largest city of Türkiye, the infor-
points (6.2 percent relative to the control mean). In our field experiment, which included
treatment group voting for the more pro-democracy opposition coalition by 3.7 percentage
an equally large impact on voting intentions—increasing the likelihood of individuals in our
liefs about the state of democracy and media freedom in Türkiye and their utility, as well as
event, we found the opposite. Online, the informational treatment had a large effect on be-
democratic or there is not much to gain from greater democracy or media freedom. In the
or have been firmly convinced by propaganda that either Turkish institutions are suﬀiciently
Turkish voters, this would be evidence that they do not care about democratic institutions
Against this background, if the information we provided turned out to be disregarded by
the general consensus in the research literature).
of democracy and free media in combating natural disasters and corruption (compared to
in practice (compared to V-DEM scores), and they systematically underestimated the value
Türkiye to be more democratic and to have a more free and independent media than it did
of the governing coalition had major misperceptions about these issues—they considered
citizens in 2023. We document that, before experiment, the majority of the supporters
natural resource disasters and corruption—two issues that were top of mind for Turkish
democracy and media freedom have evolved in the country and their role in dealing with
field experiment, where Turkish voters were presented with accurate information on how
Tayyip Erdog̃an and his AKP Party. We designed an online experiment and a large-scale
in Türkiye, taking place under the shadow of growing authoritarianism of President Recep
In this paper, we study these questions in the context of the historic May 2023 election
area, we are far from a comprehensive understanding of these issues.
[2016], Chen and Yang [2019]). Despite growing interest and a blossoming literature in this

27
are additional important areas for research.
the role of better information and different political strategies in reversing this trend
• Several other directions on why democracy has been in retreat around the world and
realistic or overoptimistic aspirations about what democracy can deliver.
in the municipal elections one year after our experiment) and whether they may build
durable effects (which our results suggest may be the case based on voting patterns
• Another set of interesting questions is whether new and credible information can have
evidence with existing and new theoretical frameworks in the literature.
patterns we are seeing in our study and more generally help us integrate this type of
• It would be very useful to develop theoretical models that can help us understand the
direction.
types of interventions and shocks can break such traps would also be an interesting
governments more stable and democracy less likely to take root. Further study of what
their voters that democracy is not for them and this in turn making authoritarian
can lead to self-fulfilling traps—for example, authoritarian governments convincing
• Another interesting area is to explore whether information-political support feedbacks
information.
tions and whether it can effectively correct misperceptions when it provides accurate
could investigate whether it has typically contributed disproportionately to mispercep-
media, from traditional media, and from parties and politicians. For each source, one
teresting to distinguish between information from one’s own social network, from social
beliefs that are immune to new information. In this context, it may be particularly in-
fluenced by accurate information and whether there are dimensions of ideology and
• It would also be interesting to investigate what types of misperceptions can be in-
of the party that is disfavored by this information.
larizing impact and when it will be accepted by even those who are generally supportive
• Future work can investigate more systematically when new information will have a po-
list a few of them.
Our results raise several additional questions that are ripe for future research. Here we
influence those that are broadly supportive of the authoritarian government.
voters that have lived for an extended period under an authoritarian regime and can even
This suggests that accurate information that is impartially presented can have an impact on

28
can be found. Panel B presents the evolution of the five dimensions of democracy separately.
egalitarian. This composite index is also the one used in Acemoglu et al. [2024], where more details
indices measuring different dimensions of democracy, electoral, liberal, participatory, deliberative and
the V-DEM data set. Panel A displays the composite democracy index, which is the average of five
Notes: This figure plots the evolution of democracy scores in Türkiye between 1990 and 2022, from
Participatory Deliberative Egalitarian
Average Electoral Liberal
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
B. Evolution of V-DEM Democratic Score Components
1990 2000 2010 2020
30
40
Erdoğan
AKP
Difference:
is
50 becomes
2000
vs
created Prime
2022
Minister
60
70
A. Evolution of V-DEM Democratic Score
Figure 1: Evolution of Democracy in Türkiye

29
Appendix Table A-1.
the V-DEM data set. The whiskers show 95 percent confidence intervals. For more details on variables and measurement, see
left) and democracy (on the right) have evolved between 2000 and 2023. The dashed line indicates the actual change from
the patterns are not impacted by our treatments. Panel B measures perceptions about how respondents think media (on the
achieving better outcomes. For this latter variable, we restrict the sample to individuals in the control group to ensure that
of Institutions variable, which measures the extent to which individuals believe that democratic institutions are important for
Panel A shows, on the left, the extent to which individual support authoritarian governments, and on the right, our Valuation
Nation Alliance, HDP supporters, and non-voters). Aﬀiliations are on the basis of self-reported votes in the 2018 election.
Notes: This figure presents baseline views of participants in the online experiment by political aﬀiliation (People’s Alliance,
Didn't vote People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP Didn't vote People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP
-40
Actual (V-DEM)
-40
Actual (V-DEM)
-20
-20
0
0
20 20
40 40
Media Democracy
B. Perceived and Real Change in State of Institutions Between 2000 and April-May, 2023
Didn't vote People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP Didn't vote People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP
1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
Autocracy Sometimes Preferable Valuation of Institutions (Control Group)
A. Perceived Valuation of Institutions
Figure 2: Baseline Institutional Views

30
A-1.
treatment being statistically different from the placebo. For more details on variables and measurement, see Appendix Table
the bars are for these differences being statistically different from zero. The p-values at the very top are for the informational
listed in Appendix Table A-3 as controls). The whiskers show 95 percent confidence intervals, while the p-values on top of
treatments (corresponding to OLS estimates of equation (1) in the text, which includes the full set of pre-treatment variables
between the heights of the bars for treatment and control groups gives our baseline estimates of the effect of the informational
are in standard deviation units. Vote for the Opposition and Turnout are dummy variables for voter intentions. The difference
Institutions measures perceptions of how democratic institutions have evolved between 2000 and 2023 in Türkiye. Both variables
extent to which individuals believe that democratic institutions are important for achieving better outcomes, and State of
treatments on voter beliefs in Panel A and self-reported voting intentions in Panel B. Valuation of Institutions measure the
Notes: This figure summarizes the main results from the online experiment. It presents estimates of the informational
Control Bundled Media Democracy Control Bundled Media Democracy
Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment
0.50 0.75
0.80
0.55
0.85
0.60
p=0.60 p=0.62 p=0.69
0.90
p=0.00 p=0.00
0.65
p=0.00
p=0.00 p=0.01
0.95
p=0.00
0.70
1.00 p=0.37 p=0.30 p=0.20
p=0.92 p=0.85
p=0.30
0.75 p=0.33
p=0.41 p=0.02
Vote for the Opposition Turnout
B. Voting Outcomes
Control Bundled Media Democracy Control Bundled Media Democracy
Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment
2.4 1.2
2.5 1.3
2.6 1.4
p=0.71 p=0.54 p=0.00 p=0.00
p=0.00
p=0.98 p=0.02
p=0.11
p=0.70
p=0.04
p=0.08 p=0.23 p=0.08 2.7 1.5
p=0.01
p=0.01
p=0.00 p=0.02
p=0.07
2.8 1.6
2.9 1.7
Valuation of Institutions State of Institutions
A. Beliefs
Experiment
Figure 3: Treatment Effects on Beliefs and Voting Outcomes in the Online

more details on variables and measurement, see Appendix Table A-1.
strata fixed effects. The whiskers show 95 percent confidence intervals, while the p-values on top of the bars are for these differences being statistically different from zero. For
the coast), neighborhood-level controls from the 2018 election (opposition’s vote share, turnout, and number of registered voters), as well as dummies for different regions and
registered voters at each ballot box in 2023, ballot-box geographic controls (population density, precipitation, temperature, ruggedness, distance to Istanbul, and distance to
the 2SLS estimates of equation (2) in the text, with the fraction of households with completed canvassing instrumented with treatment dummies). We include the number of
The difference between the heights of the bars for treatment and control groups gives our baseline estimates of the effect of the informational treatments (corresponding to
C. In this figure, we focus on the bundled treatment, which is a dummy variable for either to high-credibility or the basic informational treatment at the neighborhood level.
turnout in the 2023 first and second round presidential, and parliamentary elections in Panels A and B, and the opposition’s vote share in the 2024 municipal election in Panel
Notes: This figure summarizes the main results from the field experiment. It presents ballot box-level estimates of the treatment effects on the opposition’s vote share and
Control Treatment Control Treatment
Control Treatment
0.45 0.75 0.45
0.50 0.80 0.50
31
0.55 0.85 0.55
p=0.81
p=0.91
p=0.02 p=0.72 0.60 0.60 0.90
p=0.02
p=0.03 p=0.03
0.65 0.95 0.65
Presidential First Presidential Second Parliamentary Presidential First Presidential Second Parliamentary
Municipal 2024
A. Opposition’s Vote Share (2023 Election) B. Voter Turnout (2023 Election) C. Opposition’s Vote Share (2024 Election)
Figure 4: Treatment Effects on Voting Outcomes in the Field Experiment

different. For more details on variables and measurement, see Appendix Table A-1.
zero. The p-values at the very top are for the high-credibility and basic informational treatments and the effects from canvassing with different aﬀiliations being statistically
regions and strata fixed effects. The whiskers show 95 percent confidence intervals, while the p-values on top of the bars are for these differences being statistically different from
distance to the coast), neighborhood-level controls from the 2018 election (opposition’s vote share, turnout, and number of registered voters), as well as dummies for different
the number of registered voters at each ballot box in 2023, ballot-box geographic controls (population density, precipitation, temperature, ruggedness, distance to Istanbul, and
(corresponding to the 2SLS estimates of equation (2) in the text, with the fraction of households with completed canvassing instrumented with treatment dummies). We include
three panels. The difference between the heights of the bars for treatment and control groups gives our baseline estimates of the effect of the different informational treatments
presents ballot box-level estimates of the treatment effects on the opposition’s vote share in the 2023 first and second round presidential, and parliamentary elections in the
Notes: This figure shows results from the field experiment, separately for the high-credibility and basic informational treatments and also the aﬀiliation of the canvasser. It
Control High-credibility vs Basic Canvasser Affiliation Control High-credibility vs Basic Canvasser Affiliation Control High-credibility vs Basic Canvasser Affiliation
High-credibility Basic Non-affiliated İYİ CHP High-credibility Basic Non-affiliated İYİ CHP High-credibility Basic Non-affiliated İYİ CHP
0.50
32
0.55
p=0.12 p=0.02 0.60
p=0.05 p=0.68
p=0.04 p=0.02
p=0.68 p=0.10 p=0.03 p=0.17
p=0.63 p=0.09 p=0.56 p=0.06 p=0.08 p=0.48
p=0.09 0.65
p=0.57
p=0.82 p=0.86 p=0.84
0.70
A. Presidential First B. Presidential Second C. Parliamentary
Figure 5: Unbundled Treatment Effects on Voting Outcomes in the Field Experiment

33
being statistically different from the placebo. For more details on variables and measurement, see Appendix Table A-1.
for these differences being statistically different from zero. The p-values at the very top are for the informational treatment
Appendix Table A-3 as controls). The whiskers show 95 percent confidence intervals, while the p-values on top of the bars are
(corresponding to OLS estimates of equation (1) in the text, which includes the full set of pre-treatment variables listed in
heights of the bars for treatment and control groups gives our baseline estimates of the effect of the informational treatments
institutions have evolved in Türkiye. These perception variables are in standard deviation units. The difference between the
institutions are important for achieving better outcomes, and State of Institutions measures perceptions of how democratic
change in state of institutions. Valuation of Institutions measure the extent to which individuals believe that democratic
informational treatment effects on self-reported intention to vote for the opposition, valuation of institutions and perceived
respectively, below and above the median of the relevant variables. We show separately control means, placebo effects and
the deterioration in the state of institutions at baseline (Panel B). We define these two groups as the participants that are,
ration in the state of institutions at baseline (Panel A) and those who accurately estimate (or overestimate) the deterioration
Notes: This figure plots treatment effects in the online experiment separately for respondents who underestimate the deterio-
Control Placebo Treatment Control Placebo Treatment Control Placebo Treatment
0.75 2.6 0.3
0.80
2.8 0.5
0.85
3.0 0.7
0.90 p=0.27 p=0.25
p=0.94
p=0.53
0.95 3.2 p=0.20 0.9 p=0.19
p=0.61
p=0.43
p=0.33
1.00
3.4 1.1
Vote for the Opposition Valuation of Institutions State of Institutions
B. Overestimate Deterioration in State of Institutions at Baseline
Control Placebo Treatment Control Placebo Treatment Control Placebo Treatment
0.15 1.7 1.7
0.20
1.9 1.9
0.25
p=0.02
p=0.37
2.1 2.1
0.30
p=0.15 p=0.00
p=0.00
p=0.00 p=0.29
2.3 2.3
p=0.00
0.35
p=0.00
0.40 2.5 2.5
Vote for the Opposition Valuation of Institutions State of Institutions
A. Underestimate Deterioration in State of Institutions at Baseline
Previously Believe Institutions Worsened between 2000 and April-May, 2023
Figure 6: Online Experiment Results Are Driven by Individuals Who Did Not

34
different from zero. For more details on variables and measurement, see Appendix Table A-1.
whiskers show 95 percent confidence intervals, while the p-values on top of the bars are for these differences being statistically
vote share, turnout, and number of registered voters), as well as dummies for different regions and strata fixed effects. The
ruggedness, distance to Istanbul, and distance to the coast), neighborhood-level controls from the 2018 election (opposition’s
of registered voters at each ballot box in 2023, ballot-box geographic controls (population density, precipitation, temperature,
with the fraction of households with completed canvassing instrumented with treatment dummies). We include the number
baseline estimates of the effect of the informational treatments (corresponding to the 2SLS estimates of equation (2) in the text,
treatment at the neighborhood level. The difference between the heights of the bars for treatment and control groups gives our
this figure, we focus on the bundled treatment, which is a dummy variable for either to high-credibility or the basic informational
treatment effects on the opposition’s vote share in the 2023 first and second round presidential and parliamentary elections. In
B) the median of the opposition’s vote share in the 2018 parliamentary election. It presents ballot box-level estimates of the
Notes: The figure plots treatment effects in the field experiment separately for neighborhoods below (Panel A) and above (Panel
Control Treatment
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
p=0.29
0.65
p=0.27
p=0.29
0.70
Presidential First Presidential Second Parliamentary
B. Neighborhoods with Above Median Opposition’s Vote Share in 2018
Control Treatment
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55 p=0.02
p=0.06
p=0.03
0.60
0.65
0.70
Presidential First Presidential Second Parliamentary
A. Neighborhoods with Below Median Opposition’s Vote Share in 2018
Against the Opposition
Figure 7: Field Experiment Results Are Driven by Neighborhoods Previously

35
ticity. For more details on variables and measurement, see Appendix Table A-1.
informational treatments being equal. Standard errors are robust against heteroskedas-
of observations, the mean of the dependent variable and the p-value for the placebo and
includes all baseline characteristics we have access to. The table also reports the number
we observe imbalances in Table A-3 at 5% and 10% level, respectively, while Column 5
same individual. Columns 3 and 4 additionally include the baseline variables for which
controls. Column 2 includes the pre-treatment value of the dependent variable for the
for the opposition (Panel C) (see notes to figures for definitions). Column 1 includes no
perceived change in state of institutions (Panel B) and self-reported intention to vote
ment to varying the set of controls. Panels are for evaluation of institutions (Panel A),
Notes: This table explores the robustness of our main results from the online experi-
Full set of controls Yes
Imbalanced controls Yes Yes Yes
Outcome at baseline Yes Yes Yes Yes
No controls Yes
p-value: Placebo=Treatment 0.077 0.032 0.002 0.001 0.000
Mean 0.593 0.593 0.593 0.593 0.593
Observations 4,275 4,034 3,950 3,636 3,636
(0.020) (0.016) (0.010) (0.010) (0.009)
Treatment 0.054 0.037 0.032 0.036 0.037
(0.020) (0.015) (0.010) (0.010) (0.009)
Placebo 0.025 0.009 0.005 0.006 0.005
C. Vote for the Opposition
p-value: Placebo=Treatment 0.092 0.139 0.070 0.039 0.006
Mean 1.377 1.377 1.377 1.377 1.377
Observations 4,343 4,070 3,986 3,678 3,678
(0.041) (0.032) (0.020) (0.020) (0.018)
Treatment -0.116 -0.069 -0.060 -0.058 -0.068
(0.041) (0.032) (0.020) (0.020) (0.017)
Placebo -0.060 -0.030 -0.030 -0.023 -0.028
B. State of Institutions
p-value: Placebo=Treatment 0.032 0.019 0.006 0.007 0.003
Mean 2.556 2.556 2.556 2.556 2.556
Observations 4,232 3,966 3,892 3,614 3,614
(0.041) (0.038) (0.032) (0.033) (0.032)
Treatment 0.097 0.073 0.060 0.055 0.065
(0.042) (0.038) (0.032) (0.033) (0.032)
Placebo 0.024 0.000 -0.010 -0.016 -0.012
A. Valuation of Institutions
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Different Control Sets
Table 1: Bundled Treatment Effects in the Online Experiment – Robustness to

robust against heteroskedasticity. For more details on variables and measurement, see Appendix Table A-1.
of observations, the mean of the dependent variable and the p-value for the placebo and informational treatments being equal. Standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood level and are
from the 2018 election (opposition’s vote share, turnout, and number of registered voters), as well as dummies for different regions and strata fixed effects. The table also reports the number
each ballot box in 2023, ballot-box geographic controls (population density, precipitation, temperature, ruggedness, distance to Istanbul, and distance to the coast), neighborhood-level controls
strata fixed effects. Columns 2, 5, 8, and 11 include strata fixed effects and the outcome in the pre-treatment period (2018). Columns 3, 5, 9, and 12 include the number of registered voters at
based on 2SLS estimates of equation (2) in the text, with the fraction of households with completed canvassing instrumented with treatment dummies. Columns 1, 4, 7, and 10 includes only
B respectively which are presented for the 2023 presidential, the 2023 presidential run-off, the 2023 parliamentary, and the 2024 local elections as indicated in the header. The estimates are
Notes: This table explores the robustness of our main results from the field experiment to varying the set of controls. Outcomes include opposition’s vote share and turnout, in panels A and
Full set of controls Yes Yes Yes Yes
Outcome in 2018 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Strata fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Mean 0.878 0.878 0.878 0.853 0.853 0.853 0.867 0.867 0.867 0.781 0.781 0.781
Observations 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,840 2,840 2,840
36
(0.008) (0.005) (0.005) (0.009) (0.006) (0.005) (0.009) (0.006) (0.005) (0.015) (0.014) (0.010)
Treatment -0.003 -0.002 -0.002 -0.002 -0.000 -0.001 -0.003 -0.001 -0.001 -0.013 -0.010 -0.009
B. Dependent Variable is Turnout
Mean 0.548 0.548 0.548 0.582 0.582 0.582 0.579 0.579 0.579 0.556 0.556 0.556
Observations 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,840 2,840 2,840
(0.022) (0.011) (0.010) (0.021) (0.012) (0.010) (0.021) (0.010) (0.010) (0.020) (0.015) (0.013)
Treatment 0.023 0.023 0.023 0.021 0.021 0.021 0.022 0.021 0.021 0.028 0.027 0.031
A. Dependent Variable is Opposition’s Vote Share
Presidential First Presidential Second Parliamentary Municipal 2024
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
Table 2: Bundled Treatment Effects in the Field Experiment – Robustness to Different Control Sets