source.
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
Paladines. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
© 2019 by Vivi Alatas, Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Markus Mobius, Benjamin A. Olken, and Cindy
official NBER publications.
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25589.ack
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
Research.
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Government Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. The views expressed herein are those of
Science Registry (AEARCTR-0000757). Funding for this project came from the Australian
(Protocol #1406006433) and Stanford (Protocol #31451), and registered in the AEA Social
and their team for providing support for this project. This study was approved by IRBs at MIT
Moeloek, then Indonesian Special Envoy for Sustainable Development Goals, Diah Saminarsih,
Sebastian Steffen, Vincent Tanutama provided excellent research assistance. We thank Nila
Kaye, Nurzanty Khadijah, Devika Lakhote, Eva Lyubich, Sinead Maguire, Lina Marliani,
Wai-Poi, Alex Wolitsky, and participants at various seminars for helpful discussions. Aaron
Eckles, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Ben Golub, Rema Hanna, Mary Gray, Matt Jackson, Matthew
We thank Marcella Alsan, Nancy Baym, Emily Breza, Leo Bursztyn, Rebecca Diamond, Dean
February 2019
Cambridge, MA 02138
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25589
Working Paper 25589
Cindy Paladines
Benjamin A. Olken
Markus Mobius
Arun G. Chandrasekhar
Vivi Alatas
A NATIONWIDE TWITTER EXPERIMENT PROMOTING VACCINATION IN INDONESIA
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK:
NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/757
A randomized controlled
markusmobius@gmail.com
and NBER
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1285
4322 North Quad 105 S. State St.
University of Michigan
School of Information
Markus Mobius
arungc@stanford.edu
and NBER cpaladines@worldbank.org
Stanford, CA 94305 Washington, DC 20433
579 Serra Mall 1818 H St, NW
Stanford University The World Bank
Department of Economics Cindy Paladines
Arun G. Chandrasekhar
bolken@mit.edu
valatas@worldbank.org and NBER
Jakarta, Indonesia Cambridge, MA 02142
Tower 2, 12th & 13th Floor 50 Memorial Drive
Jakarta Stock Exchange Building MIT
World Bank Department of Economics, E52-542
Vivi Alatas Benjamin A. Olken
important role for celebrity endorsement.
immunization-seeking behavior by one's network. Taken together, the findings suggest an
that overall exposure to the campaign may influence beliefs about vaccination and knowledge of
reduces diffusion. By randomizing which celebrities tweeted when, we find suggestive evidence
without the celebrities' imprimatur. By contrast, explicitly citing sources in the tweets actually
far more likely to be liked or retweeted by users than similar tweets seen by the same users but
effects. Endorsements matter: tweets that users can identify as being originated by a celebrity are
what information is passed on along a retweet chain on Twitter to parse reach versus endorsement
retweet content promoting immunization from their accounts. Our design exploits the structure of
organizations, with a total of 7.8 million followers, who agreed to let us randomly tweet or
conducted a nationwide Twitter experiment in Indonesia with 46 high-profile celebrities and
whether on net their statements actually lead people to change their beliefs. To do so, we
endorsement per se has an effect beyond the fact that their statements are seen by many, and
Celebrity endorsements are often sought to influence public opinion. We ask whether celebrity
ABSTRACT
JEL No. D85,I15,O33
February 2019
NBER Working Paper No. 25589
Vivi Alatas, Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Markus Mobius, Benjamin A. Olken, and Cindy Paladines
When Celebrities Speak: A Nationwide Twitter Experiment Promoting Vaccination In Indonesia

Of course, it is possible that the endorsement effect could be negative.
2
activists Alicia Garza, Patrisse Cullors, and Opal Tomet and #IceBucketChallenge by Peter Frates.
Campaigns are typically initiated by lesser-known activists. #BlackLivesMatter was created by writers and
1
more likely that people will hear information from multiple sources.
celebrities, as seeding information with very central individuals such as celebrities makes it
more powerful than hearing it from one person. If so, that implies an additional role for
message. It is also possible that hearing information from multiple different sources may be
other hand, it is possible that inclusion of credible sources itself discourages passing on the
the information would be less subject to doubt and presumably carry more value. On the
explicitly endorsed. For instance, if the tweets used systematically cited verifiable sources,
More generally, the messaging itself may vary in credibility in ways beyond whether it is
but their voice per se has an additional effect.
that celebrities have an outsized importance: it is not just that they reach so many people,
or people may simply want to be like her. If the endorsement effect is present, this means 2
may lead people to update about the quality of the product or the importance of that cause,
their reach. The fact that Kim Kardashian was willing to endorse a given product or cause
by many people. Moreover, celebrities may have an endorsement power above and beyond
watching what Kim Kardashian says or does, and hence her actions and utterances are seen
first issue concerns why celebrities matter so much. Celebrities have broad reach—people are
Key questions, however, are both whether and why certain campaigns are so effective. The
whether to advance public-interest causes or to promote products.
participation. As a result, policymakers and firms often seek out celebrity endorsements, 1
initiated by a less-well-known activist, but was made prominent in part through celebrity
by a wide range of celebrities, from Oprah to Bill Gates. Each of these campaigns was
disease, became the sixth most used social issue hashtag of all time following participation
them). In public health, the #IceBucketChallenge, promoting awareness of Lou Gehrig’s
Serena Williams, and Zendaya (with over 211 million non-unique Twitter followers among
Kim Kardashian, Colin Kaepernick, Lin-Manuel Miranda, Kerry Washington, Kanye West,
Prominent celebrity users include, among others, LeBron James, Drake, Carmelo Anthony,
used social issue Twitter hashtag of all time, with 41 million uses as of September 2018.
Examples abound. #BlackLivesMatter, a campaign against racial injustice, is the most-
very participation in ongoing discussions can make issues prominent and shape the zeitgeist.
variety of issues, many of which are far removed from their original reason for fame. Their
millions of online followers, celebrities have a direct channel to spread messages on a wide
Social media has allowed celebrities to take an increasing role in social discourse. With
Introduction
1.
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 1

fact never happened during the campaign.
Celebrities were allowed to a veto a tweet if they did not want it sent from their account, though this in
3
and retweets) on Twitter are public information, we can precisely map which individual sees
who sees whose tweets) and virtually all information flows over the network (i.e., tweets
Twitter also has a number of useful features for our study. Because both the network (i.e.,
example, in 2012 its capital, Jakarta, originated the most tweets of any city in the world.
We chose this setting for several reasons. Indonesia is very active on social media; for
behavior, through generating conversations and perhaps health-seeking responses?
online information campaign about a public health topic lead to changes in beliefs and offline
extent of exposure that they induce through their messaging? Second, does exposure to an
of the reach of the celebrity, the endorsement effect, the content of the message, or the
understand whether and why celebrity-involved campaigns have influence? Is it because
The random variation allows us to causally address two sets of questions. First, can we
of the campaign did this influencer-tweet/retweet event happen?
account?; (2) Did the tweet explicitly cite a source to bolster its credibility?; (3) Which days
randomly from the same tweet library) sent by us from an an ordinary (non-celebrity) user’s
/ organization send the tweet from their account, or did they retweet a message (drawn
The experiment randomly varied the tweets along three dimensions: (1) Did the celebrity
affect the text or timing of the tweets. 3
(“Let’s Immunize”). All our participants joined knowing that they would not be able to
Indonesian Ministry of Health, all of which featured a campaign hashtag #AyoImunisasi
of each of these tweets was randomly chosen by us from a set of tweets approved by the
33 tweets or retweets promoting immunization from their accounts. The content and timing
tions, with a total of over 7.8 million followers, each of whom gave us access to send up to
Working with the Special Ambassador, we recruited 46 high-profile celebrities and organiza-
ernment’s Special Ambassador to the United Nations for Millennium Development Goals.
campaign on Twitter from 2015-2016 in Indonesia, in collaboration with the Indonesian Gov-
To study these issues, we conducted an experiment through a nationwide immunization
the content involves citing or linking to a source all are subject to endogeneity concerns.
cisely, these messages have an impact. Moreover, the precise choice of content and whether
a celebrity bundles reach and endorsement effects, making it hard to disentangle why, pre-
speak on a topic, and could isolate the impact on a particular individual, a given action by
Even if one could credibly solve the endogeneity problem of whether celebrities choose to
impossible to isolate the impact of information from a particular source on overall beliefs.
ing. People also consume information from such a wide variety of sources that is also near
determined and influenced by the general information environment into which they are speak-
foremost, celebrities’ decisions about whether to make public statements are endogenously
Understanding the nature of social influence is challenging for several reasons. First and
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 2

1
detail in Section 3.1 below, and show that the results are largely similar in the subset of cases where F s
1
A challenge in the design is that the F decision to retweet may be endogenous. We discuss this issue in
5
James (42 million), and Shah Rukh Khan (37 million) as of January 2019.
million), Bill Gates (46 million), Narendra Modi (45 million), The New York Times (43 million), LeBron
DeGeneres (77 million), Kim Kardashian (59 million), Donald Trump (58 million), CNN Breaking News (55
Among the most followed worldwide are Katy Perry (107 million), Barack Obama (104 million), Ellen
4
due to knowing that the celebrity was involved. In the period we study, the ordering of
5
2
as compared to the former: differences in F ’s behavior therefore correspond to differences
2
that in this way, F is randomly blinded to the celebrity’s involvement in the latter case,
2 1 2
(F s) observe only that the Joe/Jane tweeted and that F then retweeted for F to see. Notice
Joe/Jane’s message rather than composed it herself, the followers-of-followers of the celebrity
1
F message and that retweeted it. But in the second case, when the celebrity retweeted a
2 2
whom we denote F . The followers-of-followers (F s) observe that the celebrity authored the
1
In the first case, some celebrity followers (whom we denote F ) retweet it to their followers,
and Janes”; these Joes/Janes are also participants on our campaigns).
tweets but originated by a normal citizen (whom we henceforth denote as a “ordinary Joes
compared to 2) when we have a celebrity retweet a message drawn from the same pool of
between what happens when 1) we have a celebrity directly compose and tweet a message,
We exploit this feature to distinguish reach from endorsement. Consider the difference
follower, but not any intermediate steps in the path.
follower observes who originally composed the tweet, and who retweeted it directly to the
a message to one’s followers. Crucially for our design, when a message is retweeted, the
of how information is passed on Twitter. Messages in Twitter are passed on by retweeting
tease out the role of celebrity endorsement per se, our design exploits the unique structure
– using variation we induced within celebrities in the nature and content of their tweets. To
We begin with our core question – unpacking why and how celebrity messages may matter
directly message en masse and engage on timely issues.
politicians, and organizations are widely followed. As such, influencers have a platform to
4
users, Twitter provides a platform for individuals to broadcast messages widely. Celebrities,
of information exchange in the world. With over 1 billion users and 328 million active
Beyond being a useful lab for our study, Twitter is one of the most important mediums
responses to what they saw on Twitter.)
behavior) and offline (by conducting a phone survey of Twitter users and linking their survey
responses to information both online (by observing their online “liking” and “retweeting”
effects. Finally, again because of the public nature of Twitter, we can observe people’s
problem of endogenous speaking behavior, as well as disentangle reach vs. endorsement
in which we randomly vary who tweets what when, we can both solve the identification
how much exposure they had to precise bits of information. By conducting an experiment,
what information, as well as where they saw it from, allowing us to observe for each user
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 3

with, adding commentary or simply ironically, “liking” the tweet directly conveys approval.
followers. While it is certainly the case, a priori, that individuals may retweet tweets that they even disagree
the action is not pushed to one’s followers), while “retweet” subsequently passes on the tweet to all of one’s
Recall that a “like” corresponds to simply clicking a button to indicate that one likes the message (and
6
2
sample of exposed F s is identical.
were also study participants whom we randomly selected and forced to retweet exogenously, and hence the
by 2.5-fold, the effect flattens out after that.
the probability of retweeting two-fold, and going from one to three increases the probability
complex contagion, but with concave effects: while going from one to two messages increases
central individuals such as celebrities may matter more. We find evidence consistent with
(complex contagion), the diffusion processes wind up being very different. In the latter case
on messages after a single exposure (simple contagion) versus requiring many exposures
the probability of passing on the message? This is important because if an individual passes
multiple times (from multiple different sources) have linear, concave, or convex effects on
The final piece of our online analysis is to examine exposure effects: does hearing a message
effects on the probability the information is passed.
theoretically how increasing the reliability of information passed has ex ante ambiguous
One interpretation is the information is less novel if it is sourced; more generally, we discuss
the celebrity retweets corresponds to a 50 percent decline in the subsequent retweet rate.
The magnitudes are substantial: for instance, randomly attaching a source to a tweet that
celebrity themselves, or composed by an ordinary Joe/Jane and retweeted by a celebrity.
randomly assigned a source. This is true regardless of whether tweet was composed by the
We find, perhaps surprisingly, that messages are less likely to be passed on if they are
a given tweet is randomly assigned to have a verifiable source attached to its claim or not.
We then look to the role of source citation, exploiting our second randomization of whether
the message in the first place was completely exogenous.
2
exogenously had them retweet the message, ensuring that whether the F was exposed to
1
when restrict attention to those cases where F s are participants in the experiment and we
similar messages when the celebrity’s involvement was masked. We find similar results even
individual, there is an 70 percent increase in the number of likes and retweets, compared to
and that message was randomized to be composed by a celebrity as compared to an ordinary
find using this design that when an individual observes a given message through a retweet,
We find strong evidence that the celebrity’s endorsement per se matters. In particular, we
specific tweet.
6
likes and retweets, so we can observe the reactions of every individual follower to every
We study the impacts of this induced variation using online reactions to the tweets, i.e.,
in the Twitter feed.
about the celebrities involvement without affecting how prominently the message appeared
2
the Twitter feed was strictly chronological, so this design manipulates whether the F s know
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 4

friend, and relative networks. In particular, we ask whether knowledge of immunization
We then turn to respondents’ knowledge of immunization behavior in their neighbor,
knowledge we examined.
in knowledge in the whole sample), though no increase in the three other dimensions of
probability that the respondent knows that vaccines are domestic (on a base of 58 percent
deviation increase in exposure to the campaign corresponds to a 12 percent increase in the
Muslim law), all of which were addressed in some of the campaign tweets. A one standard
ernment as domestically produced vaccines are known to be halal and hence allowed under
whether the vaccine was domestically produced, an important public message for the Gov-
tion. We asked phone respondents a number of factual questions about immunization (e.g.,
then show that exposure to the campaign may have increased knowledge about immuniza-
in the number of times they report having heard about immunization through Twitter. We
probability they have heard about immunization through Twitter; and a 14 percent increase
in the phone survey knows about our hashtag, #AyoImunisasi; an 11 percent increase in the
about one month, corresponds to a 20 percent increase in the probability that the respondent
equivalent to about 15 tweets or retweets showing up on a user’s Twitter feed over a period of
a one standard deviation increase in exposure to the campaign due to our randomization,
dorsements does have measurable effects. We begin by showing that people did pay attention:
The evidence using this variation, while suggestive, indicates that exposure to celebrity en-
each individual had potentially been exposed to as of the time of our survey.
generates random variation in how many immunization-related tweets from our campaign
our celebrities each of these followers followed at baseline, this randomization into two phases
followers of our celebrities in between these two groups of tweets. Since we know which of
2015 - February 2016 (Phases II and III). We conducted a phone survey of a subset of
July and August 2015 (Phase I) and the second group assigned to tweet from November
we randomized the celebrities into two groups, with the first group assigned to tweet during
of the tweets to randomly generate differences in exposure to our campaign. Specifically,
has effects on real-world beliefs, knowledge, and behavior. To study this, we used the timing
celebrity messages on immunization – a natural next question is whether such a campaign
Given that people seem to pay attention to the campaign online – liking and retweeting
out to maximize repeated exposure.
repeated messaging but rather to wider messaging: a budget of messages should be spread
can actually slow down a campaign. And at the margin, efforts should be placed not to
effect but their endorsement effects as well. In contrast, perhaps counterintuitively, sources
a social media campaign. Celebrity involvement is crucial, not only for their direct broadcast
Taken together, the findings suggest an important set of considerations in policy design of
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 5

diffusion.
An important exception is Beaman and Dillon (2018) who look at how gender plays a role in information
7
ernments and large-scale policymakers are interested in, as represented by the Ministry of
we note that our study represents exactly the kind of public awareness campaign that gov-
Moreover, unlike these previous studies, which have been carried out in smaller scales,
allows us to separate these two effects.
the information changes both of these simultaneously; our experimental design, by contrast,
and that individual’s position in the network go hand-in-hand, so varying who is sending
information matters per se. Indeed, this is because normally the identity of an individual
7
tion, it has typically been silent on whether the identity of the individual who passes on the
information over social networks, and how position in the network affects the flow of informa-
one that involves major influencers. Moreover, while this literature has studied the flow of
sents the largest randomized controlled trial of an online diffusion experiment, particularly
Beaman, BenYishay, Magruder, and Mobarak, 2016). To our knowledge, our paper repre-
Katona, Zubcsek, and Sarvary, 2011; Banerjee, Chandrasekhar, Duflo, and Jackson, 2013;
public policy (Ryan and Gross, 1943; Kremer and Miguel, 2007; Conley and Udry, 2010;
Related Literature. This work relates to a literature on the diffusion of information for
by one’s neighbor, friend, and relative network members.
offline knowledge about facts and the knowledge of health status and health-seeking behavior
find consistent evidence that celebrity endorsements actually may affect a combination of
their children. In sum, while the estimates in each domain are suggestive, taken together we
Twitter campaign were more likely to report that their network members actually immunized
neighbors, relatives, and friends—of those exposed to the campaign, those exposed to the
study. But casting a wider net, we find consistent evidence that in each type of network—
is unlikely that any given member of our sample had a child exactly in the duration of our
power is such that we cannot rule out substantial effects. This is not surprising, because it
network. We find no effects on one’s own immunization decisions, though our statistical
We look at changes in reported immunization decisions of respondents and those in their
et al., 2014).
midwife, that occur each month in each neighborhood (dusun or RW ) of Indonesia (Olken
immunization practices in Indonesia, which take place at posyandu meetings, staffed by a
The idea that one would learn about immunization decisions of neighbors is consistent with
recent immunization behavior. We find no increases in knowledge for friends and relatives.
corresponds to a 23 percent increase in the probability of knowing about one’s neighbors’
the celebrity pro-immunization campaign: a one standard deviation increase in exposure
fline discussion about immunization in their respective networks. Again we find effects of
behavior of members of each of these networks increased, which is a soft measure of of-
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 6

(2018).
Mobarak (2016); Banerjee, Chandrasekhar, Duflo, and Jackson (2018a); Akbarpour, Malladi, and Saberi
Kim, Hwong, Staff, Hughes, O’Malley, Fowler, and Christakis (2015); Beaman, BenYishay, Magruder, and
See Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos (2003, 2005); Banerjee, Chandrasekhar, Duflo, and Jackson (2013);
9
the impact on TV viewership.
and Jiang (2017), who experimentally vary tweets in China on Sina Weibo about TV programs and measure
generates random variation in exposure within the social network. It is also related to Gong, Zhang, Zhao,
the effects of greater vs. less participation in social media on political outcomes. By contrast, our paper
overall spread of a social network in Russia due to connections with the network’s founder, and look at
In that sense, our paper is related to Enikolopov, Makarin, and Petrova (2016), who use variation in the
8
confirm the importance of seeding information with influential people.
online public health campaign generates only short-timed diffusions. The results therefore
hear if from multiple distinct sources, (iii) there are only a few celebrities, and (iv) that an
well-connected source (e.g., a celebrity), (ii) individuals are more likely to pass it on if they
show that (i) people are much more likely to pass on information if it originally came from a
makers should identify “central” individuals in a network to generate diffusion. Our results
9
Finally, there has also been recent theoretical work exploring how (and whether) policy-
media, studying the online and offline effects of a large-scale social network campaign.
8
2017; Bursztyn and Cantoni, 2016; Allcott and Gentzkow, 2017). Our paper moves to social
DellaVigna, Enikolopov, Mironova, Petrova, and Zhuravskaya, 2014; Martin and Yurukoglu,
2007; Enikolopov, Petrova, and Zhuravskaya, 2011; Gentzkow, Shapiro, and Sinkinson, 2011;
e.g., Alsan and Wanamaker, 2017; Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2004; DellaVigna and Kaplan,
behavior, political positioning, voting behavior, and economic behavior more generally (see,
to mass media such as newspapers, television, and radios can contribute to health-seeking
behavior, with an emphasis on civic engagement. The literature demonstrates that exposure
Furthermore, the paper speaks to a literature that has looked at how media exposure affects
limited and minimal way, policy impact.
behavior to offline beliefs and behavior, we can take a step towards measuring, albeit in a
all endogenous. Our experiment allows us to move past this. Further, by linking our online
what celebrities say, whether they cite sources, whether they endorse others’ messages are
parse what aspects of celebrity involvement matters. Of course, in observational studies,
is no causal evidence for the role of influencers here, and certainly no causal evidence to
identifying and targeting any particular influencer. As the research notes, however, there
more worthwhile to seed a message through a bunch of ordinary citizens as compared to
diffusion. Much of the literature concludes that under a wide range of assumptions, it is
social media, and through observational studies looks at what drives and does not drive
et al., 2011). This literature follows online diffusions through Twitter, Facebook, and other
There is also a literature on generating online cascades (Leskovec et al., 2007; Bakshy
has never been studied experimentally before.
Health’s and World Bank’s interest in partnership. To our knowledge, something like this
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 7

accounts_140m_in_the_US
https://semiocast.com/en/publications/2012_07_30_Twitter_reaches_half_a_billion_
12
https://www.statista.com/statistics/490548/twitter-users-indonesia/
11
facebook-users/
https://www.statista.com/statistics/268136/top-15-countries-based-on-number-of-
10
ties” come from a wide range of backgrounds, including pop music stars, TV personalities,
with a total of 7.8 million Twitter followers, to participate in our experiment. These “celebri-
Development Goals, we recruited 37 high-profile Twitter users, whom we denote “celebrities,”
With help from the Indonesian Special Ambassador to the United Nations for Millennium
styles of the participants.
formal Indonesian, and one using casual/street Indonesian, to match the written tweeting
munize”). Each tweet was written in Indonesian, and two versions were prepared—one using
by the Ministry of Health, and all included a common hashtag, #AyoImunisasi (“Let’s Im-
source (either a specific link or an organization’s Twitter handle). All tweets were approved
made domestically in Indonesia and are therefore halal). For each tweet, we also identified a
and information designed to combat common myths about immunization (i.e., vaccines are
the importance of immunization (i.e., immunizations are crucial to combat child diseases);
(i.e., immunizations are free, available at government clinics, and so on); information about
tion about immunization. The tweets included information about access to immunization
developed in close coordination with the Ministry of Health that sought to improve informa-
as part of its drive to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. A set of 550 tweets was
as it was a government priority, as Indonesia was trying to improve its immunization rates
The focus of the experiment was on improving immunization. Immunization was chosen
anywhere in the world, narrowly exceeding Tokyo. 12
cities of origin found that Indonesia’s capital, Jakarta, was the top city producing tweets
These Twitter users are active as well: in 2012, a study that linked individual tweets to their
number of Twitter accounts, with over 16.8 million (about 6.4 percent of the population). 11
accounts, with 126 million in 2017 (about half the population); it also ranks third in the
10
study social media dynamics. Indonesia ranks fourth worldwide in the number of Facebook
being a developing country, Indonesia is quite active on social media and an excellent place to
2.1. Setting and Sample. Our study took place in Indonesia in 2015 and 2016. Despite
Experiment
2.
to offline changes in beliefs and behavior. Section 5 concludes.
endorsement effects. Then Section 4 asks whether the increased online chatter corresponds
results. We study the mechanisms of the online diffusion process and explore a variety of
recruitment, experimental design, and sample statistics. In Section 3, we present our main
Organization. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the setting,
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 8

The website showed sample tweets to demonstrate the style.
13
of our survey.
random variation in the amount of exposure a particular follower had received at the time
into phases (i.e., in which months particular celebrities tweeted); this allows us to generate
sure the overall impact of the Twitter campaign on offline beliefs, we randomized celebrities
were tweeted or retweeted by celebrities. We describe each of these in turn. Second, to mea-
the role of celebrity endorsements, we randomized the content of tweets and whether they
retweets among our participants. The design has two main components. First, to investigate
The experimental design consists of the randomizing the content and timing of tweets and
demonstrate the ambiguity, though certainly other models can be used.
presents an application of a simple model by Chandrasekhar, Golub, and Yang (2018) to
actually theoretically ambiguous, and hence ultimately an empirical question. Appendix A
retweeting process demonstrates that, in fact, the effect of each of these design options is
reasons the information may be viewed as more credible). But thinking carefully about the
information is more credible) and celebrity involvement is better (after all, for a variety of
messaging. Ex ante it may seem obvious, for instance, that sources are better (after all the
the campaign should emphasize repeated messaging to the same people or more widespread
the message contains a credible source, (c) the content of the message, and (d) whether
our disposal are (a) the originator of the message (a Joe/Jane or a celebrity), (b) whether
social media campaigns are important for disseminating a message. The choices we have at
2.2. Experimental Design. Our experiment is designed to understand which aspects of
(to better approximate their normal writing style), either formal or slang language. 13
maximum number of tweets to authorize (13, 23, or 33), and (2) a writing style for the tweet
of Health, and (3) has no scope for editing. Participants were given two choices: (1) the
content of the tweets from a large list of 549 immunization tweets approved by the Ministry
that (1) lets us tweet content from their account (13, 23, or 33 times), (2) randomize the
Every participant (both celebrities and Joes/Janes) consented to signing up with our app
a mean of 511 followers.
a variety of Indonesian universities. They are far more typical in their Twitter profiles, with
be important for identification. These Joes/Janes consist primarily of university students at
tant, everyday individuals compose tweets that are then retweeted by celebrities, which will
Joes and Janes”. The role of the Joes/Janes will be to allow us to have essentially unimpor-
In addition to the celebrities, we recruited 1032 ordinary citizens, whom we call “ordinary
issues in Indonesia with a mean of 132,300 followers each.
lion followers. We also recruited 9 organizations involved in public advocacy and/or health
They have a mean of 262,647 Twitter followers each, with several having more than one mil-
actors and actresses, motivational speakers, government officials, and public intellectuals.
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 9

does not affect the ordering of tweets in a user’s Twitter feed.
(July 2015 through February 2016) tweets appeared in strictly chronological order, our experimental design
March 2016) applied an algorithm to prioritize the ordering of the tweets, but since in the period we study
in strict reverse chronological order (i.e., newest tweets appeared first, and so on). Twitter subsequently (in
Note that in the period we study, a Twitter user saw all tweets and retweets from the users they follow
14
Indonesia, constrained between the hours of 7 a.m. to 11 p.m. Jakarta time.
ical distribution of tweets by day-of-week we have from historical Twitter data in
Each tweet event on a given day is then randomly assigned a time from the empir- •
Conditional on being active in a given day, each celebrity tweets one time. •
phase.
ganization signed up for being randomly distributed over the days in the assigned
probability that corresponds to the number of tweets/retweets the celebrity or or-
Conditional on being active in a phase, each celebrity is active on a given day with •
II/III.
Every celebrity and organization is randomly assigned either to Phase I or Phases •
Summarizing, the experimental design is as follows:
4 below.
randomization to estimate the impact of the Twitter campaign on offline beliefs in Section
of these celebrities have actually tweeted about immunization. We use this between-celebrity
study a given Twitter user follows, at the time of the endline survey it is random how many
August - October 2015). This means that, conditional on the number of celebrities in our
offline endline survey (see Section 2.3) was conducted in between these two phases (i.e., late
the experiment (November 2015 - February 2016) (see Figure 2). The key point is that our
(July and August 2015), while Group II celebrities tweeted in the second and third phases of
organization, and tweet count. Group I celebrities tweeted in the first phase of the experiment
two groups, stratified by number of followers (above or below median), style, celebrity or
Second, to measure the overall effect of exposure, we randomized our celebrities into
detail in Section 3 below. A schematic of the design is provided in Figure 1.
endorsement, as well as the role of repeated exposure to information, as described in more
Joes/Janes. These various randomizations allow us to identify the role of celebrity reach vs.
all tweets / retweets by a celebrity were then retweeted by a randomly selected number of
(i.e., the source link or referring organization’s Twitter handle). In addition, in Phase III, 14
by a celebrity; and, for a subset of tweets, whether the tweet included the ‘credibility boost’
a tweet was tweeted directly by a celebrity, or tweeted by a Joe/Jane and then retweeted
from our pre-prepared bank of approved tweets was tweeted by whom and when; whether
we randomized the precise timing of tweets (which day and what time of day); which tweet
First, within each phase, we randomized virtually all aspects of the tweets. Specifically,
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 10

represents 5.5 million unique users.
Since a given user can follow multiple celebrities, the 7.8 million total followers of celebrities in our sample
16
only compare non-sensitive material tweets which would be randomly assigned to receive a source.
Consequently in analyzing source citation, we condition appropriately on non-sensitive tweets, to ensure we
also given priority to be sent out, so they comprise a larger share of low tweet count celebrities’ tweets.
Another set of tweets always carried a source because they covered more sensitive material. They were
15
1
coming from a direct follower of a celebrity as F events, and those retweets / likes coming
path through which the tweet could have reached the user. We denote those retweets / likes
followers’ followers when the follower retweeted) from the baseline to construct the shortest
retweeting behavior. For each of these events, we used the complete follower network (and
16
a celebrity’s follower, we also scraped all of this follower’s followers and their liking and
followed at least one of the participants in our study. When the tweet was retweeted by
each time the tweet was liked or retweeted by any of the over 5.5 million unique users who
For each the of the 672 total tweets that were originated by our experiment, we tracked
is depicted in Figure 3.
pushed out as tweets to a user’s followers. An example of a campaign tweet, with a source,
user has liked, and can look up who has liked a given tweet), likes are not automatically
whereas likes do. Second, while likes are visible (a user can look up which tweets another
retweets. First, retweets do not necessarily imply endorsement of the views of a tweet,
to propagate over the Twitter network. There are two main differences between likes and
has seen a tweet rebroadcasts it to their entire follower network; this allows information
“retweets”. A like is a expression of approval of the tweet. A retweet is when someone who
There are two main types of behaviors that people who see tweets can do, “likes” and
in Indonesia at baseline.
of any celebrity participating in our study. This allows us to construct the follower network
collected an image of the publicly available Twitter network, including the list of followers
via the Twitter Firehose and Twitter API. Before the experiment began, in early 2015, we
2.3.1. Online data. We collected detailed data on relevant behavior on the Twitter platform
in turn.
Data, (i.e., data collected via a phone survey about respondents’ beliefs). We discuss these
Twitter about behavior on the Twitter platform with respect to our tweets), and Offline
2.3. Data. We use two types of data in the study, Online Data, (i.e., data collected via
For a subset of tweets, they were randomized to receive a source. • 15
on the organization or celebrity’s style.
Each of these events is then randomly drawn a tweet from the tweet bank, conditional •
composed tweet with the celebrity or organization retweeting it.
1/2 to be an celebrity-composed tweet and with probability 1/2 to be a Joe/Jane-
Conditional on a given tweet/retweet event, it is randomly assigned with probability •
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 11

improvement on immunization knowledge in our study sample.
percent thought that vaccines are free of cost (they are). This suggests substantial room for
cent of individuals thought that vaccines are domestically made (they are), and only 38.5
considerable confusion about the nature and value of vaccines. For instance, only 56 per-
Panel C reports baseline statistics for beliefs about vaccinations. We see that there is
slightly younger, and have a similar gender composition.
nationally representative SUSENAS sample, we see that our demographic is more urban,
SUSENAS, the annual representative Indonesian national household survey. Relative to the
ple selection in our sample, we also present comparable data from the 2014 wave of the
Table 1, Panel B reports demographics of our offline survey sample. To gauge the sam-
tweets.
(approximately 73 percent) by phone for a baseline survey prior to the beginning of Phase I
by phone during the endline period; we also contacted a subsample of these respondents
2,441 total subjects, all of whom we could link to Twitter. All respondents were surveyed
Twitter handle so that we could link them to the Twitter network. This process resulted in
participant. When users came to the website to sign up to participate, we obtained their
with higher rates of ads for women and for individuals who followed more than one study
the recruitment ads to the 5.5 million unique users who followed participants in our study,
participate in a healthcare survey that particularly targeted women. We specifically targeted
To recruit this sample, we advertised with promoted tweets on Twitter a recruitment to
Twitter.
recent immunizations of children of close friends, and questions about immunization and
intended to counteract), immunization history for children in the family and knowledge of
mation about immunization (including beliefs in some of the various myths our tweets were
one of our study participants on Twitter. The phone survey was designed to capture infor-
we conducted a phone survey on a sample of 2,441 subjects, all of whom followed at least
2.3.2. Offline data. To measure whether online conversations led to offline behavioral changes,
we recruited have on average 508 followers.
ers. The followers of our celebrities have on average 1,379 followers. The Joes/Janes that
celebrities on average have 262,648 followers whereas the organizations have 145,300 follow-
Table 1, Panel A reports descriptive statistics using Twitter data on our subjects. Our
2
and F events in more detail in the analysis below.
2 1
from a follower of a follower of a celebrity as F events. We use the distinction between F
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 12

we cannot use other tweet-level randomizations in this section to look at offline beliefs or behavior.
In particular, the randomizations we exploit here are within-celebrity, and hence within-Phase. Therefore
17
depicted in Figure 5.
2
written this tweet herself rather than retweeted it, this would be visible to the F . This is
is likely to be blind to the celebrity’s involvement. On the other hand, if the celebrity had
1 2 2
F F F that retweeted it. But crucially does not know that the celebrity had retweeted it:
1 2
by F , observe that F sees the message, sees that it is composed by a Joe/Jane, and knows
2
celebrity) F . If the celebrity retweets the message by a Joe/Jane, and then this is retweeted
1
some follower F and then to some follower of this follower (who does not directly follow the
our experimental design, as summarized in Figure 5. Consider a chain from a celebrity to
We exploit this feature of Twitter—that intermediaries in a retweet chain are lost—in
of the original writer who retweeted it to the person who retweeted it to j—are unobserved.
and of the person whom j follows who retweeted it. Any names in between—say, a follower
dent j who sees a retweet observes two names: the name of the original writer of the tweet,
Our identification strategy exploits a particular feature of retweets in Twitter. A respon-
effect due to their involvement).
because when they pass on it is more likely to be subsequently passed on (the endorsement
in diffusion on social media is due simply to their reach (the size of their network) or also
3.1. Value of celebrity involvement. We begin by asking whether a celebrity’s influence
on how a particular tweet reached a particular user.
that allow us to differentiate responses both tweet by tweet, and also differentially depending
“retweets” by ordinary Twitter users of messages composed or shared by our celebrities—
of the individual tweet. We therefore focus in this section on online responses—“likes” and
17
the variation we explore here is much finer, our outcome variables must also be at the level
level—i.e., the randomly induced variation in who tweeted or retweeted what when. Since
To untangle these mechanisms, in this section we use the variation we induced at the tweet
passing of information.
social value. Further, multiple exposures as compared to a single exposure may lead to more
inclusion may impede transmission, say if passing such a benefit accrues the sender less
whereas if it lacks a source, this may impede transmission. On the other hand, source
explicitly listing a source may be more likely to be passed on if viewed as more credible,
authored a message, this provides scope for an endorsement effect. Similarly, a message
The key idea is that if a celebrity is known to be involved in passing a message, or have
This section explores our main results that characterize the value of endorsement per se.
The Value of Endorsement
3.
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 13

2
in passing the message almost triples the likelihood that the F responds online.
2
followers-of-followers of the celebrity), having the F be aware of the celebrity’s involvement
2
ized across tweets) and holding the F position in the network constant (since they are all
These results imply that, holding the content of the tweet constant (since it is random-
2
followers-of-followers (F s) . The results are similar when we look at likes or retweets alone.
Poisson model, the coefficients are interpretable as the change in log number of retweets) by
a 1.7-fold increase in the retweet or like rate (column 1, p = 0.001; note that since this is a
relative to having a Joe/Jane compose the message and the celebrity retweeting it leads to
We see large endorsement effects. Having a celebrity compose and tweet the message
1, 3, and 5 present the results on the full sample for each of these dependent variables.
whether an agent liked the tweet, and (3) whether an agent retweeted the tweet. Columns
three main outcome variables: (1) whether the agent either liked or retweeted the tweet, (2)
Table 2 presents our results. As discussed in more detail in Section 2.3.1 above, we have
2
being observable to the F -level person making the decision to retweet.
having been written by the celebrity (as compared to being written by a Joe/Jane) and this
The key coefficient of interest is α, which measures the differential impact of the tweet
randomized.
tcm
errors are clustered at the level of original tweet t, which is the level at which Celeb is
p
absorb variation casual/formal style chosen, etc., as well as phase fixed effects (ω ). Standard
c
importance of immunization, etc). All regressions include celebrity fixed effects (ω ), which
m
dummies (ω ) for the different types of messages (e.g., dummies for it being about a fact,
1
the original tweet (t) level. We control for the log number of followers of the F , and for
regression, with robust standard errors to allow for arbitrary variance terms clustered at
2
itself either liked or retweeted again by an F . Since y is a count, we estimate a Poisson
trcmp
tweets, and the dependent variable y is a count of how many times this retweet was
2
her identity is not visible to the F ). Each observation is a retweet of one of our original
2
hence her identity if visible to the F ), and 0 if the celebrity retweeted a Joe/Jane (and hence
tcm
variable Celeb is a dummy that takes 1 if the celebrity authored the tweet herself (and
c indexes a celebrity, m indexes the type of message content, and p indexes phase. The
1
where t indexes a tweet, r indexes a retweeter (i.e., an F who retweeted the tweet t),
r
trcmp trcmp tcm c m p
(3.1) E[y ] = exp (α Celeb + β log(Followers) + ω + ω + ω ) |x · ·
To test this, we estimate, by Poisson regression, the equation
2
celebrity endorsement effect by looking at F ’s behavior.
originally tweeted by a Joe/Jane and then retweeted by the celebrity, we can identify the
By randomizing whether the message is originally tweeted by the celebrity, or instead
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 14

2
meant to be a representative subsample of the entire F network.
2 tcm
of this exercise is to make sure the F s are exogenous to Celeb , but this sample by construction is not
in this sample would have necessarily have the same retweet rates overall as in the main sample; the point
2
leads to larger standard errors in these columns in a Poisson model. Of course, there is no reason the F s
Note that the mean level of retweets in this sample is 0.01, compared to 0.04 in the main sample, which
19
this to an appendix. Also, we condition on non-sensitive tweets for this sample.
Recall that we only have 7 organizations, which reduces the overall instances of such cases, so we relegate
18
sample is not leading to substantial bias. 19
1
in columns 1, 3, and 5 suggests that the possible endogenous selection of F s in our whole
2, 4, and 6 respectively), but the fact that results are broadly similar to the overall effects
reduced somewhat in this restricted sample (p-values of 0.119, 0.111, and 0.107 in columns
larger than those in the full sample, and we cannot reject equality. Statistical significance is
Columns 2, 4, and 6 present the results. The point estimates are if anything somewhat
is guaranteed to be exogenous by construction.
2 2
sample of F s, but for this sample we have the advantage that whether an F sees the tweet
message. We analyze this experiment by estimating equation (3.1) just as we did for the full
as we randomly vary whether the celebrity, an organization, or a Joe/Jane composes the
1
followers of F Joe/Jane’s we exogenously forced to retweet a particular tweet—responded
1
we created exogenous F s. For this sample, we can look at how their followers—that is, the
had their accounts retweet our celebrities’ tweets and retweets in the experiment; that is,
1
F s, and so direct followers of our celebrities. For some of these Joes/Janes, we randomly
tion. Specifically, in Phase III of the experiment we use the subset of Joe/Jane who are also
To address this issue, in Phase III of the experiment, we added an additional randomiza-
place.
2
lead to selection bias in terms of which F s are more likely to see the retweet in the first
1
nevertheless be a compositional difference in which F ’s retweet it, which could potentially
so there is no mechanical reason there would be a bias in equation (3.1). But there may
2
who retweeted the message, and hence the number of F s who could potentially retweet it,
1
a Joe/Jane. In equation (3.1), we always control for the log number of followers of the F
affected by the fact that the celebrity composed the message, rather than retweeting it from
1
respond to our treatment. Namely, which F s choose to retweet the message may be directly
1
of interest, whether a given agent sees a retweet from his or her F ’s may be endogenous and
2
first is that when we look at F agents, i.e., those who are at distance two from the celebrity
There are, however, two main potential threats to our identification strategy here. The
endorsement effect of similar magnitude.
being randomly assigned to compose a message rather than a Joe/Jane has a substantial
in Table D.1 of Appendix D. We show that similar to celebrity effect, an organization 18
We document similar effects of an organization being the originator rather than a Joe/Jane
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 15

(column 3, p < 0.001).
likely to like the tweet (column 2, p < 0.001) and 3.8 time more likely to retweet the tweet
a tweet composed from the celebrity rather than a retweet of a Joe/Jane is 2.2 times more
retweet/like rate increasing 3-fold (column 1, p < 0.001). In fact, an agent who observes
We find evidence of a large endorsement through authorship effect for celebrities with the
versus the celebrity leads to a higher retweet rate.
interested in whether the tweet being randomly assigned to be composed by the Joes/Janes
c p m
continue to include celebrity (ω ), phase (ω ), and message-type (ω ) fixed effects. We are
1
or likes by F agents who are distance 1 from the celebrity passing along the tweet. We
We now have one observation per tweet, and look at the number of retweets/likes, retweets,
tcmp tcmp tcm c m p
(3.2) E[y ] = exp (α Celeb + ω + ω + ω ) . |x ·
1
restrict to direct followers of the celebrity (F individuals), and estimate
Table 3 presents the results of Poisson regressions at the tweet level. That is, we now
celebrity composed it as compared to simply being a conduit?
the message by passing it on, is there an extra endorsement effect from knowing that the
ask, for a given individual, even if they know that a celebrity is involved and endorsing
message composition and passing in order to estimate an endorsement effect. We next
were effectively randomly blinded to whether a celebrity was or was not involved in the
3.2. The preceding analysis compared individuals who Value of celebrity authorship.
a large endorsement effect.
individual is 1.7 times more likely to retweet or like the tweet. This indicates that there is
posed by an authority in the sense of a celebrity as compared to thinking it is a random
Taken together, our results suggest that an agent who knows that the message was com-
1 2
on the number of F or F retweets that the given tweet faces.
that being randomly assigned one, five, ten, or even fifteen extra retweets makes no impact
tweet or retweet (this is of course net of the forced Joe/Janes’ behavior). What we find is
retweets and likes on the number of Joes/Janes that were forced to retweet a given celebrity’s
forced to retweet a particular tweet. Appendix C, Table C.1 presents a Poisson regressions of
also helps us address this issue, because we randomly varied the number of Joes/Janes we
likelihood of retweeting. The same Phase III randomization of forced Joe/Jane retweets
treatment assignment affects the retweet count, this itself could spur further changes in the
and the number of likes next to the heart graphic). One may worry then that since our
user views it (see Figure 3, which shows the number of retweets next to the arrow graphic
tion about how many times the original tweet has been retweeted or liked as of the time the
The second potential confound comes from the fact that a retweet carries with it informa-
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 16

for which we randomized whether the source was included or not.
the Government always included a source, as we noted above. We restrict the analysis here to those tweets
Note that the number of observations is smaller here, because some tweets on topics deemed ‘sensitive’ by
22
the Indonesian Pediatric Society).
cards set up. There is one non-Google shortened link used when citing IDAI (Ikatan Dokter Anak Indonesia,
Note that Twitter automatically produces a short preview of the content if the site linked to has Twitter
21
We must condition on non-sensitive topic tweets for this analysis.
20
is essentially interpreted as a source.
originally tweets the message, which is consistent with the idea that the organization itself
up having no effect when an organization itself (here largely health based organizations)
(a 29.3 percent decline, p = 0.002). Sources only cease to have an adverse effect and wind
message (a 50 percent decline, p = 0.02) or when the celebrity directly tweets the message
we find that the large reductions in retweet rates persist when a Joe/Jane composed the
celebrity composed and tweeted the message or retweeted a Joe/Jane or an organization,
retweeting behavior (a decline of 27.2 percent, p = 0.048). Disaggregating across whether the
the retweet and liking rate by 26.3 percent (p = 0.051). This is particularly driven by reduced
On average, pooling across all messaging configurations we find that source citation reduces
and the celebrity retweets an organization (columns 4, 8, 12).
retweets the Joes/Janes (columns 2, 6, 10), the celebrity directly tweets (columns 3, 7, 11),
and 9-12 look at likes. We also condition the regressions to the sample where the celebrity
4 presents the results. Columns 1-4 look at pooled likes and retweets, 5-8 look at retweets,
variable that captures whether the tweet was randomly selected to include a source. Table 22
1
To examine this question, we re-estimate equation (3.2) at the F level, but also add a
there is a Google shortened link provided.
21
Ministry of Health (known as DepKes in Indonesian). Second, explicit sources are cited, and
complete? @puskomdepkes’ where “@puskomdepkes” is a link to the Twitter handle of the
“Polio vaccine should be given 4 times at months 1, 2, 3, 4. Are your baby’s polio vaccines
First, sources are simply provided though there is no verifiable references. This is of the form
citation increases diffusive behavior. Source citations in our context come in several forms.
3.3. Value of source citation. The next question we ask is whether including source
of a celebrity writing vs. retweeting the same message.
bility messages are passed on or liked, both overall (as above) and even within the distinction
paint a consistent picture: celebrity endorsement seems to substantially increase the proba-
On net, the results in this section complement the results in Section 3.1, which together
composed the message there is a large premium.
retweeting an organization is just as valuable, whereas if the celebrity is known to have
D. We find no added value here: that is, a celebrity retweeting a Joe/Jane and a celebrity
20
of a celebrity retweeting an organization rather than a Joe/Jane in Table D.2 of Appendix
Again, keeping in mind that we have only 7 organizations, we can look at the same effect
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 17

not matter.
enough exposures she may clear the threshold and then act, and at that point a marginal exposure should
cost to passing on a message that is not worth it. In this case, she only acts when she is sure enough; with
tweet: she only tweets or retweets if she is sure enough that it is worthwhile, because say there is a small
is unsure about whether it is worthwhile to tweet or retweet about immunization. Her default is to not
A micro-foundation for complex contagion-like behavior is as follows: consider a Bayesian individual who
23
and thereby affects the odds of something going viral.
considerably more likely that a given individual in the network receives multiple exposures
processes in that there is a premium for identifying central individuals. This makes it
be the case, roughly speaking complex contagion processes differ from simple contagion
science, applied math, sociology, economics) have different perspectives on why this may
in rural networks. While the networks literature across myriad disciplines (e.g., computer
evidence in favor of complex contagion in a different setting—that of technological adoption
Ebrahimi, and Gao, 2013). Beaman, BenYishay, Magruder, and Mobarak (2016) provide
23
adoption (Centola and Macy, 2007; Romero, Meeder, and Kleinberg, 2011; Ghasemiesfeh,
are “complex contagion” models, wherein an individual must have multiple exposures before
adoption happens at the point of a single exposure to the information. In contrast, there
matters for the design of campaigns aiming to maximize diffusion. In simple contagion,
and “complex” contagion models, both of which are extensively studied. The distinction
compared to a single exposure. In models of diffusion there is a contrast between “simple”
3.4. Value of multiple exposures. Lastly we look at the role of multiple exposures as
necessarily increase diffusion.
less, the result suggests that adding explicit credibility-boosts to celebrity messages does not
an unsourced message, or perhaps the information sounds less novel when sourced. Regard-
1
it is also possible that F s interpreted a sourced message as less authentic-sounding than
or decrease retweet rates ex ante). Various other stories are possible as well. For instance,
celebrity origination, source citation, exposure, and specific content could all either increase
value and possible lead to lower retweet rates (alongside a more general discussion of how
good). We discuss in Appendix A how adding a source could potentially reduce the signaling
1
a signaling value (conveying to followers that the F is able to discern which information is
passing on a message has both instrumental value (delivering a good message), as well as
1
There are a number of possible explanations for this finding. One idea is that for an F
(e.g., originator identity, sourcing) could have ex ante ambiguous effects on retweet rates.
reliable. But recall the discussion in Section 2.2 suggesting that each feature of the message
rates—may seem surprising, since one might expect that a sourced message may be more
presses retweet rates and the extent of diffusion. This result—that sources depress retweet
In sum, for both Joes/Janes and celebrities, including a source in tweets ultimately de-
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 18

may influence consumption of and passing on information. The results are nuanced. Our
3.5. Discussion. In this section we have studied how endorsement effects of various kinds
generate more multiple exposures.
individuals with information would have more value simply through the fact that it would
The data then shows that even without the endorsement effect itself, seeding influential
or not—complex contagion models have a premium in seeding information with influential.
in whether a policymaker must strive to contact the “right” individuals (central individuals)
is particularly important because the theory demonstrates that there is a striking difference
multiple tacit endorsements is enough to make it worthwhile for the user to behave. This
Ultimately, the evidence is consistent with a complex contagion-like model that having
retweet, since in this case the retweet count should scale linearly, but in fact it is concave.
with a model of attention where an agent randomly checks her phone and then decides to
out. This is inconsistent with simple contagion. But moreover, notice this is also inconsistent
On net, the evidence suggests the retweet shape function begins linearly and then flattens
and there is no effect for marginal exposures, which indicates concavity.
to the largest increase in the retweet rate, the second additional tweet has additional value,
estimated. This clearly rejects a linear effect model: the first additional exposure contributes
leads to no differential retweet rate relative to 1, though the point estimate is large but noisily
2.6-fold or 160 percent increase in the retweet rate (p = 0.08). Finally going to 4-7 exposures
that we are not in a world of simple contagion. Then going from 1 to 3 corresponds to a
rate or a 110 percent increase in the retweet rate (p = 0.01). That there is an effect suggests
Going from 1 exposure to 2 exposures leads to just over a two-fold increase in the retweet
user and date fixed effects.
campaign tweets that he is directly exposed to from celebrities he follows and which includes
id 1
where y is the number of retweets that an F individual i makes on date d out of the set of
k=2
id id id k i d
(3.3) E[y ] = exp α + β 1{Exposure to k tweets today + µ + µ , |x } X
K !
who follow at least 3 celebrities. We estimate a regression of the form
celebrities. Further, because we are interested in non-linear effects, we condition on a sample
assigned to tweet once per day, multiple signals will come from users who follow multiple
on the (randomly assigned) exposure to tweets on the given day. Since celebrities are only
campaign’s tweets that they see from celebrities they follow on that day by the agent depends
and the observation is at the user-date level. We ask how the number of retweets of our
1
function. We look at all agents at the F level, who are followers of our celebrity in question,
to a message. Table 5 presents a Poisson regression to examine the shape of the response
To get at these issues, we look at whether there are linear or non-linear effects to exposure
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 19

potential Phase I exposure.
campaign. We thus exploit the random variation in actual Phase I exposure conditional on
our study they follow and how many tweets those celebrities agreed to send as part of the
in Phase I, we always condition on the potential exposure, i.e., the number of celebrities in
who follow more of our celebrities are mechanically more likely to follow people who were
of tweets at the end of Phase I affects knowledge and behavior. Note that because users
binned into Phase I versus II/III, we can look at how exposure to the campaign in terms
celebrities faced greater campaign exposure, and celebrities and organizations were randomly
Figure 4 presents a schematic of the identification. Because those who followed Phase I
phone survey was randomly assigned.
number of our celebrities a user followed, exposure to our campaign as of the time of the
we conducted an offline phone survey, as described in Section 2, so that conditional on the
surable offline effects. To investigate this, we use the fact that between Phases I and II,
Next we ask whether an online celebrity endorsement campaign can begin to have mea-
Does Online Discussion Have Offline Effects?
4.
differ by content-type and how this interacts with both the who and the how much.
While taken for granted, there is limited research in terms of how we expect diffusion to
either by time or the intrinsic virality of the information, may greatly depend on the topic.
(2016) for technology adoption). Third, the extent of diffusion itself, typically parametrized
gion) plays a crucial role, in keeping with recent work in other contexts (e.g., Beaman et al.
diffusion are more likely: in this case multiple exposures (closer in spirit to complex conta-
network strongly affects diffusion of information. Second, the results suggest certain types of
exception is Beaman and Dillon (2018), who focus on how the gender of the individual in the
often swept aside, due to the obvious complexities, in typical studies of diffusion. A notable
having the celebrity be the source plays an outsized role per se. This type of concern is
passing the information and at what stage. This plays an enormous role in our setting, as
more attention ought to be paid to “node identity”—that is, who is involved in writing or
This suggests certain important themes to focus on in future studies of diffusion. First,
the outset but subsequently decline in marginal value.
contrary to common views on diffusion, but in a concave way. Multiple exposures help at
does not help: on average it reduces retweeting. Further exposures themselves do matter,
message as a Joe/Jane. At the same time, inclusion of credible sourcing in the message
retweets increase considerably when a celebrity is randomly assigned to write the same
using this approach, we find the endorsement effect per se to be large: both likes and
design allows us to parse the endorsement effect of a celebrity from the reach effect, and
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 20

including all controls, though results using LASSO-selected controls have slightly higher power.
as the right controls in our main regression (4.1). Results are qualitatively similar dropping controls and
the treatment status (as in a first stage), and then the union of these LASSO-selected variables are included
predictive of the outcome directly (as in a reduced form) and all variables that are sufficiently predictive of
double post-LASSO algorithm applies the LASSO to all covariates to select all variables that are sufficiently
learning (in this case LASSO), we can in a disciplined manner select which controls ought to be used. The
Simply put, as we have many potential covariates for which we could control, by employing machine
24
i induced by partial overlap in which celebrities our survey respondents follow, we present
i
of the complex nature of the potential correlation in Exposure to Tweets across individuals
p-values clustered at the level of the combination of celebrities followed; further, because
LASSO (Belloni, Chernozhukov, and Hansen, 2014a,b). We report standard errors and
24
graphics and baseline beliefs, selected here and in subsequent regressions by double post-
the number of followers of celebrities by i, survey dates, and (in some specifications) demo-
ties he follows. X are controls, such as the number of celebrities followed by i, the log of
of campaign tweets that i could potentially seeing through the campaign given the celebri-
i
Phase I (normalized to have standard deviation 1). Potential Exposure is the total number
i
Exposure to Tweets is the number of campaign tweets that i is randomized to see through
i i
1−P(y =1|x )
i i
(log-odds, i.e., log i i ) or Poisson regression (log of expected count, log(E[y ])). |x
P(y =1|x )  
f have heard about immunization from Twitter, and (·) is the appropriate function for logit
the agent has heard of immunization in general from Twitter, or the number of times they
i
where y is either whether the agent has heard of our hashtag #AyoImunisasi, whether
i i i i
(4.1) f (y ) = α + β Exposure to Tweets + γ Potential Exposure + δ X , · ·
0
We run logistic and Poisson regressions are of the form
I and II-III.
variation in actual exposure relative to potential exposure when we survey between Phases
randomized which celebrities went in Phase I and which in Phases II-III, there was random
celebrity they followed. Relative to this, the actual exposure uses the fact that because we
our campaign, which was a function of how many tweets/retweets were assigned to each
particular, given a location in the network, each respondent had a potential exposure under
were randomly more exposed to campaign tweets, conditional on their potential exposure. In
our hashtag (#AyoImunisasi) or heard about immunization discussions from Twitter if they
akin to a first-stage in Table 6. We ask whether respondents were more likely to have heard of
4.1. Did people hear about the campaign? We begin with what can be thought of as
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 21

in 0.197 in log-odds.
pretable as percent increases. For example, the 16.75 percent increase in column 1 corresponds to an increase
Note that the table reports impacts on log-odds; we report marginal effects in the text, which are inter-
26
p-values.
domization parameters. We use these alternate randomization results to generate randomization-inference
rations of celebrities randomized into Phase I and II/III, fully respecting the stratification and other ran-
Specifically, we re-run our randomization programs 2,000 times to generate alternative possible configu-
25
campaign.
one’s child vaccinated at government health centers. All of these issues were covered in the
about is “access” information; in particular, we ask whether they know that it is free to get
or swelling) are to be expected and not a cause for alarm. The second category we ask
for immunization. Third, we ask whether they are aware that typical symptoms (mild fevers
alternatives (breastfeeding, herbal supplements, alternative supplements) replace the need
domestic products are known to be halal). Second, we ask whether they believe that natural
them unacceptable for Muslims, who represent the vast majority of Indonesia’s population;
mon rumor in Indonesia that they contain pig products in production (which would make
we ask whether people know that vaccines are domestically produced, to combat the com-
several common “myths” about vaccination that our campaign tried to cover. In particular,
survey asks questions about several categories of knowledge. First, we check for knowledge of
ask whether exposure to the campaign led to increased knowledge about immunization. Our
4.2. Did people then increase their knowledge about immunization facts? Next we
more likely to have heard of immunization on Twitter in the general population.
exposure to our campaign tweets corresponds to more knowledge of our hashtags and being
Overall, we do see people seem to have noticed the campaign: the randomized increased
mean of 0.322 times (clustered p = 0.044, RI p = 0.127).
they heard about immunization from Twitter, there is a 11.2 percent increase relative to a
18.1 percent (clustered p = 0.106, RI p = 0.046). Finally looking at the number of times
probability they heard about immunization in general from Twitter relative to a mean of
a one-standard deviation increase in exposure corresponds to a 8.3 percent increase in the
our hashtag relative to a mean of 7.7 percent (clustered p = 0.044, RI p = 0.107). Further,
26
corresponds to a 16.75 percent increase in the probability that the respondent had heard of
We find that a one-standard deviation increase in exposure to the campaign (15 tweets)
heard of such discussions.
of immunization on Twitter, and column 3 examines the number of times the respondent
members the exact hashtag), column 2 examines whether the respondent heard of a discussion
Columns 1 examines whether the respondent heard of #AyoImunisasi (and therefore re-
i i
they follow, Exposure to Tweets is random conditional on Potential Exposure .
ties into phases means that, while individuals i may differ in the number of our celebrities
randomization-inference p-values as well. The experimental design of randomizing celebri-
25
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 22

might expect it to be the knowledge about immunization practices of ones’ neighbors. Note
in urban areas; see Olken, Onishi, and Wong (2014)), so if knowledge would increase, one
(usually hamlets, or dusun, in rural areas, and neighborhoods known as rukun warga, or RW,
take place at monthly posyandu meetings, which occur each month in each neighborhood
have the lowest mean. A similar thing is true among friends. In Indonesia, immunizations
conversations presumably are very frequent within family), whereas geographic neighbors
ingly, the relative network has the highest mean knowledge to begin with (after all, health
2015 to capture the campaign’s effect. Panel A of Table 8 presents the results. Unsurpris-
munization behavior was, which would be a byproduct of offline conversations since June
dividuals were more likely to know about what their neighbors, friends, and relatives’ im-
4.3.1. Knowledge about immunization practices of others. We begin by asking whether in-
note that the caveat that this is as reported by the respondent, not observed by us directly.
all, having a young child exactly in this age range is a sparse event—but it is important to
behavior. Looking at networks allows us to paint a picture of a wider set of individuals—after
recent immunization behavior by those in each type of network, as well as own immunization
in each type of network increases. Then, given this, we examine the respondent’s reports of
relative networks. First we ask whether the respondents’ knowledge of immunization status
of knowledge and reported behavior by respondents and those in their neighbor, friend, and
4.3. Knowledge and behavior of network members. We then look to measurements
using a Bonferroni-style adjustment; these p-values would be 0.168 and 0.112, respectively).
percent (clustered p = 0.042, RI p = 0.028; if we adjust for the fact that 4 questions are asked
of 5 percent in the probability of correctly answering the domestic question on a base of 57.6
side-effects, nor free access. Seeing 15 campaign tweets in general corresponded to an increase
most prominent tweet—domestic production—though not on rumors about substitutability,
immunization is freely provided, which concerns access. We find knowledge effects for our
provided that we asked about in our survey. Column 4 checks whether they understand that
are negligible. As described above, these three are the predominant myth-busting facts
check whether respondents understood that the substitutes are invalid and the side-effects
presents whether they understood vaccines were domestically produced. Columns 2 and 3
Table 7 presents the results for each of these four categories of information. Column 1
to other facts).
percent of all tweets and 82.4 percent of all fact-related tweets sent out (i.e., myths compared
have been more about myth-busting facts. Moreover, myth-dispelling facts comprised 36.7
diffused more widely than facts that were non-myths, meaning that the exposure would
behavior. In particular, Table B.1 in Appendix B shows that that tweets concerning myths
vaccines are not domestically produced (and therefore may not be halal), is echoed in online
The fact that we emphasize the role of messages that dispel myths, such as the fact that
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 23

we present the result in Table E.1 in Appendix E.
this (means are 3.7, 3.4, and 3.8 on the three questions, respectively). The data is essentially top-coded but
and important. The median response is a 4 (the maximal score) and respondents overwhelmingly reported
We also asked the respondents to rate on a scale of 1-4 whether they felt immunization was beneficial, safe,
27
more exposure, one may attend neighborhood health centers more and therefore observes
those who were informed about it but chose not to adopt. To take another example, with
takers were nearly seven times more likely to pass on information about microcredit than
about it. This is consistent with the results of Banerjee et al. (2013), where microfinance
neighbors, so those who took up vaccination for their children may be more likely to speak
The second interpretation is that the treatment causes differential reporting of status to one’s
actual status itself, then this regression picks up the treatment effect on vaccination itself.
the increase in reporting one’s child’s vaccination status to one’s friend is unrelated to the
be at least two natural interpretations of these results. The first interpretation is that if
true for the network of neighbors. If knowledge is itself affected by treatment, there can
vaccination status itself is affected by treatment (as discussed above). This is particularly
An important caveat to this table is that knowledge of the network members’ children’s
take-up within their network.
we ask whether exposure to treatment is associated with greater incidence of vaccination
bors, friends, and family), so this effect is distinct from the effects reported above. Then
who knew whether the vaccination status of the children of members of their network (neigh-
Specifically, we condition the sample when we look at knowledge among the network to those
spondent knows of anyone among their friends, neighbors, or family who immunized a child.
Panel B of Table 8 presents the results, where the dependent variable is whether the re-
respondents?
That is, does the campaign appear change immunization behavior as reported by our survey
more immunizing behavior since June 2015 when there is more exposure to the campaign?
among those who knew their friends, neighbors, or relatives’ immunization behavior, is there
4.3.2. Did exposure lead to changes in immunization rate? The last question to ask is whether,
that this is unlikely to change.
27
knowledge of health status of those they have closer relationships with (e.g., relatives) and
this is also consistent with the idea that for the most part, individuals have a higher rate of
the point estimates are comparably large, though the estimates are noisier. In any case,
0.088). We do not consistently see significant effects on non-neighbor friends. With relatives
increase in the probability of knowing the neighbor’s status (clustered p = 0.004, RI p =
In column 1 we see that being exposed to 15 more tweets corresponds to a 5.2 percent
survey sample.
with at least one child (ages 0-5) respectively as this is the relevant set, which reduces the
that here the sample is restricted to respondents who know friends, relatives, or neighbors
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 24

siderably. We then show that source citation has an adverse effect on diffusion. Further,
influence through reach and endorsement. We find that celebrity endorsement matters con-
We begin by studying what makes an effective campaign. First we decompose celebrity
online diffusion and offline belief change.
Twitter involving 37 celebrities and 9 organizations, to promote immunization and examine
We conducted a nationwide campaign, which consisted of randomized controlled trial on
Conclusion
5.
vaccination take-up behavior (or at least awareness of vaccination behavior in the network).
network members so as to learn their (children’s) vaccination statuses and possibly increased
knew that vaccines were domestically produced. It also increased offline conversations with
a light-touch exposure measurably led to large increases in the probability that respondents
tweet is sent out, which is a sparse event. Nonetheless, the mild increased awareness due to
on anyone’s radar. Moreover, this requires checking one’s feed around the time that the
being exposed over multiple months to a dozen or so tweets on a specific topic may not be
a mild exposure for a variety of reasons: people’s feeds are flooded with many tweets so
have changed people’s beliefs and knowledge. It is worth noting that our campaign represents
together they paint a consistent picture: a moderate-intensity Twitter campaign seems to
8-18 percent to 10-20 percent overall. While each individual result is suggestive, taken
that an immunization campaign is going on, taking the awareness rate from a mean of
more campaign tweets on immunization leads to roughly a 10-20 percent increase in awareness
4.4. Discussion. In this section we have shown that being randomly exposed to only 15
have a child in the vaccination period during our experiment.
from zero. This is unsurprising as it is very rare that a respondent is exactly well-timed to
Finally, Column 4 looks at own behavior, and our estimate is not statistically different
vaccinations in the network (clustered p = 0.159, RI p = 0.06) relative to a mean of 0.314.
An increased exposure by 15 tweets corresponds to a 9.6 percent increase in the number of
RI p = 0.071) relative to a mean of 0.353. Column 3 presents results looking at relatives.
to a 16.0 percent increase in the number of vaccinations in the network (clustered p = 0.001,
the network of friends in column 2, we see an increased exposure by 15 tweets corresponds
network (clustered p = 0.071, RI p = 0.132) relative to a mean of 0.356. When turning to
by 15 tweets corresponds to a 12.5 percent increase in the number of vaccinations in the
Column 1 shows that when looking at the network of neighbors, an increased exposure
some caution.
we present the results nonetheless, advising that the estimates are to be interpreted with
more neighbors who take-up there. We cannot separate between the two interpretations, but
WHEN CELEBRITIES SPEAK 25