permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
© 2022 by Hunt Allcott, Daniel Cohen, William Morrison, and Dmitry Taubinsky. All rights
official NBER publications.
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
Bureau of Economic Research.
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
registration. Replication files are available from allcott.stanford.edu/research/. The views
would have been difficult to pre-specify, we did not submit a pre-analysis plan with the pre-
show/NCT05038163). Because most of our empirical analyses involve a structural model that
www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/7460) and at ClinicalTrials.gov (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/
the American Economic Association Registry for randomized trials (available from
(protocol number FY2020-3805) and Berkeley (#2020-08-13558) and was registered in
No. DGE-2234667. The experiment was approved by Institutional Review Boards at NYU
work supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant
Time Sharing Experiments for the Social Sciences for grant funding. This material is based upon
National Institute on Aging (via the NBER Roybal Center grant #P30AG034532), and
helpful comments. We thank the National Science Foundation, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation,
Institute for Theoretical Economics, UC Berkeley, and the University of Copenhagen for
the NBER Summer Institute, New York University, Pompeu Fabra, Stanford GSB, Stanford
Management, the NBER Public Economics spring meeting, the NBER Roybal Conference,
Roberto, Cass Sunstein, and seminar participants at the Geneva School of Economics and
We thank Victoria Pu for exceptional research assistance. We thank Anna Grummon, Christina
December 2022,
Revised May 2024
Cambridge, MA 02138
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30740
Working Paper 30740
Dmitry Taubinsky
William Morrison
Daniel Cohen
Hunt Allcott
WHEN DO "NUDGES" INCREASE WELFARE?
NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/7460
dmitry.taubinsky@berkeley.edu
and NBER
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
530 Evans Hall #3880
Department of Economics
daniel.cohen@kellogg.northwestern.edu University of California, Berkeley
Dmitry Taubinsky
Northwestern University
Daniel Cohen
wmorrison@berkeley.edu
allcott@stanford.edu Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER MC #3880
Stanford, CA 94305 530 Evans Hall
Stanford University University of California, Berkeley
Hunt Allcott William Morrison
because they increase the variance of choice distortions.
decrease purchases of low-fuel economy cars and sugary drinks but may decrease welfare,
experiments evaluating automotive fuel economy labels and sugary drink health labels. Labels
irrelevant with zero pass-through or optimal taxes. We implement the framework with
depends on how the nudge affects the variance of choice distortions, and average effects become
endogenous prices. While many studies focus on average effects, we show that welfare also
“nudges,” such as simplified information and warning labels, in markets with taxes and
We use public finance sufficient statistic approaches to characterize the welfare effects of
ABSTRACT
JEL No. D90,H0
December 2022, Revised May 2024
NBER Working Paper No. 30740
Hunt Allcott, Daniel Cohen, William Morrison, and Dmitry Taubinsky
When do "Nudges" Increase Welfare?

1
We show that the nudge’s total surplus effect depends on two key forces. First, with any non-
nudge from the tax and is central to the welfare analysis.
to-pay (WTP) by a potentially heterogeneous amount τ . The heterogeneity of τ differentiates the
political or technical constraints, and a “nudge,” which changes each consumer’s relative willingness-
two policy instruments: a uniform tax paid by producers, which may not be set optimally due to
biases, heterogeneous consumption externalities, and producer market power. The government has
sugary drink or a sugar-free alternative) in a market with three distortions: heterogeneous consumer
In our model, heterogeneous consumers make a binary choice (for example, whether to buy a
optimal taxes or endogenous prices.
al. 2003) or “ libertarian paternalism” (Thaler and Sunstein 2003), particularly in markets with
the welfare-relevant statistics differ from earlier notions of “asymmetric paternalism” (Camerer et
including how they covary with consumer bias and externalities, is crucial. We also show that
plete and potentially misleading measure of welfare. Measuring heterogeneity in treatment effects,
clarify that despite being the focus of much empirical work, average treatment effects are an incom-
periments evaluating automotive fuel economy labels and sugary drink health labels. Our results
public finance sufficient statistic approaches. We apply the framework to novel randomized ex-
This paper develops an economic framework for evaluating the welfare effects of nudges using
average effects in the “right” direction can reduce welfare if it affects the wrong consumers.
on the labels and reduce consumption below their private optimum. Put simply, a nudge with
ignore the labels by virtue of being inattentive to health, while health nuts might focus too much
reduce average consumption, they could reduce consumer surplus: inattentive consumers might
plement health warning labels to reduce consumption. However, even if warning labels successfully
optimally. Because the average person consumes too much, a well-meaning policymaker might im-
pay attention to their health, and “health nuts” who focus on their health and initially consume
types of consumers: “inattentives” who consume more than is privately optimal because they don’t
for welfare? As a simple example, imagine that the market for unhealthy sugary drinks has two
eating (Benartzi et al. 2017; Loewenstein and Chater 2017). But are average effects a good proxy
fects in the ostensibly “right” direction—e.g., if they increase environmental conservation or healthy
Behavioral scientists often describe nudges as “successful” if they have average treatment ef-
and Linos 2022; Mertens et al. 2021).
domized experiments (Delmas, Fischlein and Asensio 2013; Hummel and Maedche 2019; DellaVigna
into the policy process (OECD 2017), and hundreds of academic papers evaluate nudges using ran-
thought to benefit individuals or society. More than 200 public agencies now incorporate nudges
exercise, social program take-up, organ donation, environmental conservation, and other behaviors
Behavioral Insights Team, nudges are being used to increase retirement savings, healthy eating,
ing, and choice architecture. Spurred by the book Nudge (Thaler and Sunstein 2008) and the UK’s
sets, such as simplified information provision, warning labels, reminders, social comparisons, fram-
“nudges”: policy instruments that can change behavior without directly changing prices or choice
In the past two decades, policymakers and academics have become increasingly interested in

2
2019 miles driven and gas price, and (iv) the EPA’s “SmartWay” environmental label. In the drinks
component of the EPA label, (iii) a personalized annual fuel cost label based on each participant’s
label required by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), (ii) the average annual fuel cost
In the cars experiment, we randomized four labels: (i) the MPG component of the fuel economy
We chose labels that have been implemented or proposed by researchers or government agencies.
health labels.
a multiple price list (MPL), and finally measure endline WTP while displaying fuel economy or
parallel structures: we first measure behavioral bias, then measure baseline relative WTP using
binary choices between sugary and sugar-free drinks with similar flavors. The two experiments have
leasing 23 mile-per-gallon (MPG) and 30 MPG sedans. In the “drinks experiment,” consumers make
experiments. In the “cars experiment,” consumers make binary choices between hypothetically
We quantify the importance of these issues by applying the theory to two online randomized
if they debias some consumers but not others.
In that case, it is heterogeneity in bias that generates misallocation, so nudges can reduce efficiency
still achieve the first best if supply is perfectly inelastic or the government can set the optimal tax.
affecting optimizing consumers. For example, a market with non-zero but homogeneous bias can
can reduce total surplus even if they improve the decisions of some biased consumers without
cases where the government can also set taxes. With optimal taxes or endogenous prices, nudges
“deliberative competence” (Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi 2022) translate to market settings and
These results clarify how asymmetric paternalism, libertarian paternalism, and improvements in
if biases are relatively homogeneous and the information debiases only a fraction of consumers.
idiosyncratic noise to choices. However, precise information could also increase distortion variance
label could also increase distortion variance if different consumers interpret it differently, adding
already paid more attention to a product’s harms also pay more attention to the label. An imprecise
Or, as in our earlier example, a warning label could increase distortion variance if consumers who
could reduce distortion variance if it has the largest effects on the most misinformed consumers.
the variance of choice distortions caused by bias and externalities. For example, hard information
The second key determinant of the nudge’s total surplus effect is the extent to which it reduces
does not matter whether a nudge decreases or increases average consumption.
governments can set optimal taxes on goods like gas guzzling cars, sugary drinks, or cigarettes, it
quantity through an optimal tax, average effects are again irrelevant. Tangibly, this means that if
allocation of that fixed quantity. Analogously, if the government can optimally control aggregate
equilibrium quantity of the good provided by the market, and all that matters is the efficiency of the
lower pass-through rates. In the limiting case with zero pass-through, the nudge cannot change the
in the “right” direction can increase welfare. However, average effects become less important at
already internalized by a tax. This supports the common intuition that average treatment effects
opposite sign from the average net distortion from bias, externalities, and market power that is not
it has average effects in the “right” direction: formally, if the average treatment effect has the
optimal tax and non-zero pass-through rate, the nudge’s total surplus effect depends on whether

3
participant’s experimental payment.
iment, because bias is defined as the difference between elicited WTP and the WTP that would have maximized the
As in Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi (2022), these are objective measures of decision quality within our exper- 1
tial variance: the estimated coefficients of variation (standard deviation of τ / absolute average τ )
We estimate that the labels increase the variance of distortions. The label effects have substan-
substitute for taxes (Loewenstein and Chater 2017; Thaler and Sunstein 2021).
average distortion, consistent with the view that nudges are not sufficiently powerful to completely
lower-MPG cars and sugary drinks. However, the labels’ average effects are much smaller than the
ties summing to 95 percent of price. All fuel economy and sugary drink labels reduce demand for
experiment, we estimate large distortions toward sugary drinks, with relative biases and externali-
biases and externalities summing to an average of about 3 percent of the typical price. In the drinks
In the cars experiment, we estimate small distortions toward the lower-MPG cars, with relative
of bias, externalities, and treatment effects.
ties. Our econometric approach addresses potential measurement error in individual-level estimates
variance depends on how much of the variance in τ represents a covariance with bias and externali-
treatment relative to control identify the average and variance of τ . A label’s effect on distortion
group WTP changes isolate elicitation noise. Thus, the average and variance of WTP changes for
baseline and endline choices represent the person-specific effect τ plus elicitation noise. The control
ment effects and heterogeneity. In the label treatment groups, the relative WTP changes between
The within- and between-subject variation in labels allows us to measure both average treat-
they chose.
we impose strong assumptions to estimate bias, but participants could actually receive the drinks
the experiment, but the decisions didn’t involve actual car purchases. In the drinks experiment,
external validity. In the cars experiment, we have an objective measure of behavioral bias within
and Taubinsky (2019a). The two experiments are complementary in how they trade off internal and
homogeneous health system cost externality for sugary drinks, again following Allcott, Lockwood
and self-control using the approach of Allcott, Lockwood and Taubinsky (2019a). We assume a
carbon. In the drinks experiment, we estimate bias from survey measures of nutrition knowledge
the incremental fuel use per mile for the 23-MPG versus 30-MPG car, and the social cost of
the “true” relative value. Relative externalities depend on how much each participant drives,
1
In the cars experiment, behavioral bias is the difference between baseline relative WTP and
the drink from their payment.
shipped them the drink they had chosen in one of their MPL choices, while deducting the price of
responses. In the drinks experiment, we randomly selected just over 20 percent of participants and
on how close their relative WTPs were to their “true” relative values implied by earlier survey
Both experiments were incentivized. In the cars experiment, participants’ payments depended
group saw no labels on their endline choices.
by Donnelly et al. (2018). The label type was randomly assigned across participants, and a control
warning label recommended by Grummon et al. (2019b), and (iii) the graphic warning label studied
experiment, we randomized three labels: (i) a magnified nutrition facts label, (ii) a stop sign health

4
with incomplete pass-through, including autos and sugary drinks (Sallee 2011; Allcott, Lockwood
measurable sufficient statistics formulas. This makes our analysis applicable to the many markets
more general setting with market power and nonlinear production costs, and to provide empirically
paper, we use techniques from Weyl and Fabinger (2013) to study the welfare effects of nudges in a
marginal costs, under parametric assumptions about how nudges affect utility. To build on that
conditions for socially optimal nudge intensity in a perfectly competitive market with constant
2020). The most closely related theory paper is by Farhi and Gabaix (2020), who derive first-order
theoretical analyses of the effects of nudges (Bao and Ho 2015; Spiegler 2015; Farhi and Gabaix
Our paper builds on previous work in several areas. Our theoretical framework builds on earlier
variance generalizes to many other settings.
periments. However, we suspect that our qualitative conclusion about the importance of distortion
sufficient statistics, but it is unlikely that our exact parameter estimates generalize outside our ex-
settings. We chose to use more artefactual designs to cleanly illustrate how to estimate the required
nudge effects requires empirical designs that would have been especially challenging in naturalistic
A key limitation of our empirical work is that estimating individual-level variation in biases and
worsens their total surplus effects.
Additional survey evidence suggests that graphic warning labels are highly aversive, which further
graphic warning labels deliver lower total surplus in our model, despite having larger average effects.
and their effects are smaller for more biased consumers. Thus, our point estimates suggest that
higher variance overall (possibly because graphic warnings have more ambiguous interpretations),
labels cause larger increases in distortion variance than nutrition facts: their treatment effects have
average effects might suggest that graphic warning labels are preferred. However, graphic warning
average WTP for sugary drinks more than nutrition facts labels, so an evaluation based only on
the magnified nutrition facts label. Our point estimates suggest that graphic warning labels reduce
As an example of how average effects can be misleading, compare sugary drink warning labels to
to consumer choice.
to optimally, our estimates suggest that adding labels could reduce total surplus by adding noise
standards and other policies to increase demand for higher-MPG cars. If those policies are set close
because some U.S. cities now tax sugary drinks, and the U.S. uses corporate average fuel economy
and both fuel economy and sugary drink labels reduce total surplus in our model. This is important
slightly decrease total surplus. With an optimal tax, the average treatment effects are irrelevant,
estimates suggest that sugary drink labels slightly increase total surplus, while fuel economy labels
total surplus in our model because they increase distortion variance. With zero tax, our point
ing labels reduce demand for lower-MPG cars and sugary drinks, they do not necessarily increase
The total surplus calculation delivers a striking result: although fuel economy and health warn-
among consumers with less bias.
while the sugary drink labels are adversely targeted in the sense that they reduce demand more
ever, the effects of fuel economy labels have statistically zero covariance with bias and externalities,
are 3.0 and 2.0 when pooling across labels in the cars and drinks experiments, respectively. How-

5
effects across different nudges is not related to the heterogeneity in one nudge’s effects across consumers.
effects across consumers within a market. This again would not fit our data, where the heterogeneity in average
a case where the variance in average effects across different nudges and settings equals the variance of one nudge’s
heterogeneous effects that are not closely related to bias. The empirical strategy (using meta-analyses) applies to
nudge offsets each consumer’s bias by some homogeneous proportion. This would not fit our data, where nudges have
strategy cannot be applied to the settings we study. Their theory considers a special case of our model where the
The important independent work by List et al. (2023) is complementary, because their theory and empirical
4
Choukhmane and Palmer (2023) apply our framework to natural experiments on retirement savings policy.
3
and Manoli 2015), vaccinations (Milkman et al. 2021, 2022), and voting (Gerber and Rogers 2009).
Hammond et al. 2012; Cantrell et al. 2013; Brewer et al. 2016; Kenkel et al. 2023), social program takeup (Bhargava
2001; Chetty et al. 2014; Beshears et al. 2015), smoking (Gine, Karlan and Zinman 2010; Thrasher et al. 2012;
2018; Knittel and Stolper 2019; Loschel, Rodemeier and Werthschulte 2022), retirement savings (Madrian and Shea
conservation (Schultz et al. 2007; Nolan et al. 2008; Allcott 2011, 2015; Allcott and Rogers 2014; Ito, Ida and Tanaka
and Kessler 2019), education (Hastings and Weinstein 2008; Jensen 2010; Allende, Gallego and Neilson 2019), energy
This includes evaluations of nudges in contexts such as charitable giving (Damgaard and Gravert 2016; Exley
2
welfare analysis, and conclusion, respectively. All proofs are in Appendix A.3.
Sections 1–5 present the theoretical framework, experimental designs, parameter estimation,
the required heterogeneity and targeting parameters could be estimated.
4
nuanced effects of treatment effect heterogeneity, and (iii) use two experiments to demonstrate how
nudges, (ii) derive sufficient statistics for welfare evaluation, including the important but sometimes
framework for evaluating corrective nudges that is portable across different markets and types of
(2018) for reviews. We differ from previous work in that we (i) provide a general public finance
behavioral bias; see Mullainathan, Schwartzstein and Congdon (2012) and Bernheim and Taubinsky
work extends the behavioral public economics literature studying optimal policy in the presence of
Choukhmane and Palmer 2023; List et al. 2023; Rodemeier and Loschel 2023). Most broadly, our
3
Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi 2022; Butera et al. 2022; Barahona, Otero and Otero 2023;
and Notowidigdo 2019; Thunström 2019; Bulte, List and van Soest 2020; Goldin and Reck 2020;
2015; Damgaard and Gravert 2018; Houde 2018a, 2018b; Allcott and Kessler 2019; Finkelstein
nudges (e.g., Carroll et al. 2009; Handel 2013; Chetty et al. 2014; Bernheim, Fradkin and Popov
Our paper also extends a group of papers that quantitatively evaluate the welfare effects of
and Sorensen 2011; Kiesel and Villas-Boas 2013; Araya et al. 2022; Barahona et al. 2022).
al. 2020; Hall et al. 2022) and nutrition information provision more broadly (e.g., Bollinger, Leslie
Roberto 2018; Grummon et al. 2019a; Grummon et al. 2019b; Grummon and Hall 2020; Taillie et
the empirical literature on sugary drink warning labels (e.g., Donnelly et al. 2018; Moran and
2017; Allcott and Knittel 2019; Rodemeier and Loschel 2022). Our drinks experiment extends
durable good energy use information disclosure (e.g., Davis and Metcalf 2016; Allcott and Sweeney
but stops short of welfare analysis. Our cars experiment extends the empirical literature on
2
Our empirical work extends a rich empirical literature that estimates the effects of nudges
and Taubinsky 2019b).

6
externalities in this section for simplicity, but without loss of generality. If consumption generates
as the “net distortion” to consumer choice caused by bias, the nudge, and the markup. We ignore
In an efficient market, all consumers with v > c (q) would buy the good. We refer to (γ + στ − µ)
′
Total surplus W is the sum of consumer surplus, producer surplus, and government revenue.
dt
Keen (1992) conjectures model also has constant θ. We define ρ := as the pass-through rate.
dp
θ = 0, Cournot competition with n firms has θ = 1/n, monopoly has θ = 1, and the Delipalla and
D
index θ := ε that is constant. For example, homogeneous-product Bertrand competition has
µp
show that a wide range of firm conduct models can be captured by an elasticity-adjusted Lerner
aggregate quantity q, market price p(q), and markup µ p c (q) t. Weyl and Fabinger (2013) := − −
′
j j j
quantity q be c(q ). We limit to symmetric equilibria where each firm produces q = q, giving
We normalize such that there is also a unit mass of firms, and we let firm j’s cost of producing
On the supply side, we follow the Weyl and Fabinger (2013) model of symmetric competition.
1 0
benefits, which may indirectly depend on p if ι = ι for some consumers. ̸
consumers who buy and don’t buy the good, respectively. We define I(σ, p) as aggregate psychic
1 0
healthy foods might make consumers feel better. We define σι and σι to be these direct effects on
example, cigarette graphic warning labels might make smokers feel worse, while labels promoting
The nudge may also impact consumption utility or impose a direct psychic cost or benefit. For
p D
ε = /D as its elasticity. −pD ′
p
τ , v and γ. We define D(p, σ) as the demand curve, D as its derivative with respect to p, and
′
would be mathematically equivalent to imposing a particular structure on the joint distribution of
smooth demand curves, but make no other assumptions. Allowing τ to be a function of v and γ
v, γ, and τ vary across consumers. We assume that the joint distribution F (v, γ, τ ) generates
if v + γ + στ > p.
arbitrarily with v and γ. Accounting for the effects of bias and the nudge, consumers buy the good
R R
increases willingness-to-pay by amount στ , where σ is the nudge intensity and τ covaries ∈ ∈ +
in Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009), Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2018), and others. The nudge
only through producer prices, so it is not heterogeneously perceived due to salience effects, as
have zero implementation cost. Because the tax is on producers, it affects consumer demand
The government has two instruments: a linear tax t on producers and a nudge, both of which
products.
to generating externalities, self- or social-signaling, or feelings of guilt around consuming certain
benefit of the product, v, can incorporate a variety of consumer motivations such as an aversion
inattention, projection bias, and imperfect information. We refer to γ as consumer “bias.” The
R,
Consumers overestimate their utility from the good by amount γ due to forces such as ∈
v at price p. We assume quasilinear utility, so the utility gain from buying the good is v p. −
We model a unit mass of consumers who choose whether or not to buy a good that delivers utility
1.1 Setup
1 Theoretical Framework

7
In other words, we assume that there is a value of v in the support of the distribution such that v + γ + στ = p. 6
Grunewald and Radbruch 2022).
licensing or moral cleansing effects, or impacts on attention to other goods (e.g., Alt and Gallier 2022; Altmann,
This general model also allows us to consider, in reduced-form, the possibility that of spillovers due to moral 5
biased consumers.
poorly targeted: it distorts the choices of unbiased consumers without improving the choices of
effects in the “right” direction. In reality, however, the label reduces total surplus because it is
Thus, a naive analysis might conclude that the labels increase welfare because they have average
consumers over-consume sugary drinks (E[γ] > 0), and the label reduces consumption (E[τ ] < 0).
h h
unbiased (γ = 0), but warning labels make them over-sensitized to health (τ < 0). On average,
o o
(γ > 0) and don’t pay attention to health warning labels (τ = 0). “Health nuts” are initially
two types of consumers. “Inattentives” don’t pay attention to health harms from sugary drinks
Example 1. Continuing our example in the introduction, consider a sugary drink market with
constant marginal cost.
For the first five examples, we assume a competitive market. For the first three, we also assume
examples can be derived formally from Proposition 1.
delivers the social optimum in the absence of market power or taxes. All conclusions in these
from psychic costs, so that a nudge that exactly offsets the bias (i.e., τ = for all consumers) −γ
γ, and that for each tuple (γ, σ, τ, t) there is always a consumer on the margin. We abstract away
6
from 0 to 1. We also assume for the examples that v is distributed uniformly and independently of
demonstrate the core intuitions. To simplify the examples, we consider the effects of changing σ
Before presenting formal results about the welfare effects of nudges, we use stylized examples to
1.2 Motivating Examples
notation for variance and covariance operators.
function X, but not of the set of consumers over which the expectation is taken. We use analogous
for any function X. The partial derivative notation symbolizes that we take the derivative of the
)|v=p−γ−στ {(v,γ,τ }
∂σ dσ ′
σ =σ m E ′
[X(v, γ, σ, τ )] := X(v, γ, σ , τ )dF . (1) |
′
∂ d Z
of notation, we define
X over the set of marginal consumers, i.e., the set γ, τ )|v + γ + στ = p}. With a slight abuse {(v,
m E
For any function X(v, γ, σ, τ ) we define [X(v, γ, σ, τ )] to be the conditional expectation of
general case of many goods with endogenous prices in Appendix A.4.
5
first good compared to the second, and let D(p) be the demand for the first good. We consider the
directly if we redefine v, p, γ, and στ as the relative utility, price, bias, and nudge effect for the
In our empirical applications, consumers choose between two goods. This framework applies
with (γ + ϕ).
a negative externality ϕ, then the net distortion and total surplus formulas hold after replacing γ

8
differ from the true one, but where they use costly attention to counteract this anchoring.
See Gabaix (2019) for a review of models where the people’s perceptions anchor on some default value that can
7
the highest v. However, with the nudge, the consumers buying the good will be the q consumers
†
is homogeneous, the consumers buying the good will always be the share q of consumers with
†
bias. This is because the share of consumers buying the good always equals q , and when bias
†
demand meets the fixed supply. Without the nudge, the market is efficient, despite the consumer
which implies pass-through ρ = 0, since the equilibrium price must always equal the value at which
1 2
consumers (τ = but does not affect that other half (τ = 0). Supply is fixed at some value q , −γ)
†
Example 4. Suppose that consumers have a homogeneous bias γ. A nudge fully debiases half of
noise relative to each consumer’s personalized values, as studied by Davis and Metcalf (2016).
the U.S. report energy costs at national average utilization and energy prices. This averaging adds
or when information is not personalized. For example, energy cost labels on appliances and cars in
This example is relevant in settings where consumers might interpret information differently,
high variance.
one distortion (γ) but adds another (ε), and it will decrease allocative efficiency if ε has sufficiently
good if v + γ ≥ p, while with the nudge, consumers buy if v + ε ≥ p. Thus, the nudge eliminates
meaning that on average, the nudge fully offsets the bias. Without the nudge, consumers buy the
E[τ
noise that is independent of γ. Thus, the covariance between τ and γ is negative and = |γ] −γ,
increases total surplus. Suppose that the nudge effects are now τ = + ε, where ε is mean-zero −γ
τ and bias γ can be key to increasing total surplus. However, this does not guarantee that a nudge
Example 3. The previous two examples illustrate how a negative covariance between nudge effects
Taubinsky 2015).
information is designed to reduce this dispersion (Bollinger, Leslie and Sorensen 2011; Allcott and
dispersion in beliefs about product characteristics such as calorie content and energy use, and hard
This example might be relevant for some types of information disclosure: consumers have wide
negative biases.
however, the nudge increases total surplus because it is well-targeted to offset both positive and
conclude that the nudge doesn’t increase welfare because it has zero average effect. In reality,
(E[γ] > 0), but the nudge does not change consumption (E[τ ] = 0). Thus, a naive analysis might
u u
and the nudge fully offsets their bias (τ = −γ ). On average, consumers overconsume the good
u o
of the population) have bias of the same magnitude but in the opposite direction (γ = < 0), −γ
o o o
population) have γ > 0, and a nudge offsets half of their bias (τ = −γ /2). “Underconsumers” (1/3
Example 2. Now suppose there are two different types of consumers. “Overconsumers” (2/3 of the
label.
7
use costly attention to counteract, but which becomes more difficult in the presence of a salient
2019). Health nuts, on the other hand, may anxiously overweight health consequences, which they
labels precisely because they don’t think such information is useful (Schwartzstein 2014; Gabaix
This example is plausible. Inattentive consumers may be both misinformed and ignore the

9
2 ∂σ p
gain is given by BCDE (dσ) + στ µ t} D . ≈ {γ − − 1 ∂ ′ 2
O((dσ) ). Thus, when dσ is small, so that terms of order (dσ) are negligible, the total surplus 2 2
2 ∂σ p p
+ (σ dσ)τ µ t} D . Equivalently, AED = ABC (dσ) + στ µ t} D + − {γ − − − − {γ − − 1 ′ 12 ∂ ′ 2 2
2 p
ABC = + στ µ t} D . The deadweight loss after a small increase dσ is AED = − {γ − −
1 2 ′
The deadweight loss at the initial equilibrium relative to the social optimum is the triangle
nudge dσ shifts demand by τ dσ; the demand decrease (as drawn) corresponds to τ < 0. ·
vertical distance between price and aggregate marginal cost is the markup plus tax µ+t. A marginal
A. The vertical distance between market demand and welfare-relevant demand is the bias γ. The
marginal utility and aggregate marginal cost; their intersection gives the social optimum at point
their intersection gives the initial equilibrium at point F. The dashed lines illustrate aggregate
nudge effect τ , and a linear demand curve. The solid lines illustrate market demand and supply;
(only), we assume full pass-through (ρ = 1), zero psychic cost (I = 0), homogeneous bias γ and
Figure 1 presents a graphical illustration of the effect of a nudge on total surplus. For the figure
1.3.1 Graphical Illustration
1.3 Effects of Nudges on Total Surplus
we present below.
full characterization that accounts for heterogeneity, pass-through, market power, and taxes, which
whether they have average effects in the “right” direction. This underscores the importance of a
These examples illustrate that the welfare effects of nudges depend on many factors other than
best obtains if there is homogeneous bias of γ = µ + t, so a nudge could only reduce total surplus.
offset. Thus, any nudge that offsets bias (−γ τ < 0) reduces total surplus. At any tax t, the first ≤
Any bias less than the markup (0 < γ ≤ µ) reduces the net distortion—the two market failures
Example 6. Suppose that there is no tax, and producers have market power, giving markup µ > 0.
This example is crucial because policymakers control both taxes and nudges in many markets.
be complements if nudges make net distortions more homogeneous.
This illustrates how taxes and nudges can be substitutes. Alternatively, the tax and nudge could
tax is constrained to t = 0, the nudge increases total surplus for a value of ρ sufficiently close to 1.
nudge again reduces total surplus by increasing the variance of the net distortion. However, if the
γ + τ is heterogeneous, so a uniform tax cannot achieve the first best whenever ρ > 0. Thus, the
Pigouvian tax of t = γ can achieve the first best. With the nudge, however, the net distortion
nudge fully debiases half of consumers without affecting the other half. Without the nudge, a
Example 5. As in the previous example, suppose that consumers have homogeneous γ and the
market with ρ < 1, which is empirically very common.
While few markets have fully inelastic supply, we will see that this intuition applies to any
distortion.
is heterogeneous. Thus, the nudge reduces total surplus by increasing the variance of the net
with the highest v + γ + τ , which will not be the q consumers with the highest v when γ + τ
†

10
m
bias γ? The term Cov [γ, τ ] formalizes Examples 1 and 2, which illustrated how nudges increase
m
holding constant the variance of nudge effects V ar [τ ], how much do the nudge effects τ covary with
variance of choice distortions caused by bias and externalities. This is the sum of two forces. First,
by the tax. The remaining terms inside brackets capture the extent to which the nudge reduces the
has the opposite sign of the distortion from biases and the markup that is not already internalized
m E
nudges increase total surplus if they have average effects in the “right” direction: formally, if [τ ]
m m
The first term inside brackets, (E [γ] − µ − t + σE [τ ]) , captures the common intuition that
2
effects.
p
Since D < 0, more negative values of the terms inside brackets imply more positive total surplus
′
<0 average distortion distortion variance
 
|{z}  | {z } | {z } 
dσ 2 ∂σ
p m m m m
= (E [γ] − µ − t + σE [τ ]) + 2σCov [γ, τ ] + σ V ar [τ ] D . (5)
2 ′ 2
 
dW 1 ∂  
 
after expanding the second moment. Further rearranging gives
psychic cost (I = 0). This makes equation (3) match the graphical illustration and equation (2),
For intuition, consider the case with non-optimal tax t, full pass-through (ρ = 1), and zero
dσ 2 dσ ∂σ ∂p
p m m E
= V ar [γ + στ ] D + + [τ ] . (4)
′
dW 1 d ∂I ∂I
m m 1 0 E
at t = [γ + στ ] µ σE [ι ι ] is − − −
∗
The total surplus change from a marginal increase in nudge intensity when the tax is set optimally
average distortion distortion variance  
 | {z } | {z } 
dσ 2 ∂σ ∂σ ∂p
p m m m
= ρ (E [γ + στ − t − µ]) + V ar [γ + στ ] D + + (1 − ρ)E [τ ] . (3)
2 ′
 
dW 1 ∂ ∂I ∂I  
 
total surplus change from a marginal increase in nudge intensity is
dp dσ
D D
Proposition 1. Assume that ε and ε are negligible whenever µ > 0. At a fixed tax t, the
d d
exogenous taxes (perhaps constrained by technical or political factors) and optimal taxes.
Proposition 1 formally presents the effects of a marginal nudge intensity increase in two cases:
1.3.2 Formal Result
2 ∂σ
p m E
dW = (dσ) (γ + στ − t − µ) D . (2)
′ 2 h i
1 ∂
marginal nudge increase dσ is the average area of BCDE areas over all marginal consumers:
Now returning to the case with heterogeneous τ the change in total surplus from the {γ, },

11
any options or significantly changing their economic incentives.”
aspect of choice architecture that alters people’s behavior in a predictable way without forbidding
“if no coercion is involved,” and Thaler and Sunstein (2008, page 6) write that “a nudge ... is any
are fully rational.” Thaler and Sunstein (2003, page 175) write that paternalism is “libertarian”
creates large benefits for those who make errors, while imposing little or no harm on those who
Camerer et al. (2003, page 1212) write that “a regulation is asymmetrically paternalistic if it
“deliberative competence" (Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi 2022) translate to market settings.
Our results clarify how asymmetric paternalism, libertarian paternalism, and improvements in
petence in Markets
1.4 Asymmetric Paternalism, Libertarian Paternalism, and Deliberative Com-
expansions.
non-financial policies such as quality standards, bans, and other forms of choice set restrictions or
While the concrete focus of Proposition 1 is on nudges, it can apply more generally to other
∂p
the optimal tax. Because of this, the factor multiplying given an optimal tax is higher.
∂I
price in two ways: through its effect on prices holding the tax constant, and through its effect on
1 2
not purchasing the product, i.e., σι versus σι . When taxes are endogenous, the nudge affects
which in turn affect how many consumers incur the psychic benefits associated with purchasing or
∂p
m
psychic benefits holding prices constant. (1−ρ)E [τ ] is an indirect effect: the nudge affects prices,
∂I
∂σ
Proposition 1 shows that the nudge has two effects on psychic benefits. is the direct effect on
∂I
marginal net distortion (including µ), µ does not appear in equation (4).
m E
term (γ + στ − µ − t) in equation (3). Because the optimal tax is set equal to the average   2
market power, and nudges that offset the bias are especially beneficial. This is reflected in the
Conversely, when a negative bias depresses demand, this is especially harmful in the presence of
itive bias offsets distortions from market power, using a nudge to offset the bias is inefficient.
The net distortion also depends on the markup µ, as Example 6 illustrated. When a pos-
the variance, as Example 5 illustrated.
through an optimal tax, the only way for a nudge to improve allocative efficiency is again to reduce
tax. The intuition is similar to the previous case: when the government controls aggregate quantity
Next, consider equation (4), the effect of a nudge when the government also sets an optimal
effect increases linearly with pass-through ρ.
net distortion, as Example 4 illustrated. Equation (3) shows that the importance of the average
supply, the only way for a nudge to improve allocative efficiency is to reduce the variance of the
m
average effect is irrelevant and the total surplus effect depends only on V ar [γ + στ ]. With fixed
sponding to fixed quantity supplied. The equation becomes identical to equation (4), where the
Now consider a different special case of equation (3) with zero pass-through (ρ = 0), corre-
surplus decreases when nudges add idiosyncratic noise to choices that is unrelated to distortions.
m
how large is the variance in τ ? The term V ar [τ ] formalizes Example 3, which illustrated how
m
surplus when treatment effects covary negatively with bias. Second, holding constant Cov [γ, τ ],

12
Appendix A.2 provides formulas for the effect of nudges on consumer and producer surplus.
8
two experiments share a common format:
We use two randomized experiments to identify utility v, bias γ, and treatment effects τ . The
(2019a) and others.
problems and imperfect information about health costs, following Allcott, Lockwood and Taubinsky
van Benthem (2019) and others. For sugary drinks, the potential biases we study are self-control
Taubinsky (2015), Sallee, West and Fan (2016), Allcott and Knittel (2019), Gillingham, Houde and
costs, following Busse, Knittel and Zettelmeyer (2013), Allcott and Wozny (2014), Allcott and
For cars, the potential biases we study are imperfect information about or inattention to gasoline
sugary versus sugar-free drinks.
focus on binary choices between closely comparable low- versus high-fuel economy sedans and
models of automobiles and types of packaged drinks, but we simplify the design and analysis to
externalities, possible consumer bias, and various types of information labels. There are many
Our empirical analyses focus on two markets (automobiles and packaged drinks) that both involve
2 Experimental Design and Data
through, no markup, and no psychic costs.
concepts do not guarantee total surplus gains outside of the special case of no taxation, full pass-
A.1 for more in-depth discussion.) Proposition 1 and the preceding examples show that these
E E
nudge improves “deliberative competence” if (γ + στ ) < γ in our notation. (See Appendix
 2  2
h i
consumers: + τ (γ, τ ). Relatedly, Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi (2022) say that a |γ | ≤ |γ|, ∀
if it weakly improves decision quality for all consumers without affecting decisions by unbiased
A natural modification might be to define an instrument as “asymmetrically paternalistic”
asymmetric paternalism.
to quantifying consumer surplus and welfare does not naturally admit a notion of libertarian or
price changes rather than directly, our analysis illustrates that the conventional economic approach
may be relevant philosophical differences between altering consumers’ utility indirectly through
ρ = 1, nudges have first-order effects on prices that scale with the average marginal τ . While there
of a “nudge.” Note that the price change is not “insignificant”: equation (6) shows that unless
shows how nudges indirectly affect economic incentives, which is not contemplated in the definition
potentially violating the definition of libertarian or asymmetric paternalism. Furthermore, this
8
Nudge-induced price changes harm or benefit all consumers, including those who are fully rational,
dσ
m
= (1 ρ)E [τ ]. (6) −
dp
is
equilibrium prices. In Appendix A.2, we show that the effect of a marginal nudge increase on price
Except in perfectly competitive markets with fully elastic supply, nudges indirectly change

13
miles driven] miles per year you told us earlier.” Participants were shown the four cars and asked
that, please imagine for the next 4 screens that gas is free and that you’d still drive the [2019
would like to have each of the 4 cars on the next 4 screens, setting aside gas costs. In order to tell us
In the final introductory questions, participants were told, “We’d like to learn how much you
gallon (MPG), while the Fusion gets 23 MPG.
Altima, Subaru Legacy, and Ford Fusion. The Accord, Altima, and Legacy each get 30 miles per
The experiment elicited yearly WTP to lease four mid-size sedans: the Honda Accord, Nissan
earlier.
You (and anyone else in your household) would drive this car the amount that you told us
•
Any dealership would offer you the same lease contract, so there’s no need to shop around.
•
To replace your primary car, you will lease a car for the next 3 years.
•
Your primary car broke down and can’t be used anymore.
•
For the entire survey, imagine the following scenario:
Participants were told,
their reported price differed from their state’s 2019 average by more than per gallon.
$0.50
were asked to enter their annual mileage twice, and we asked people to confirm their gas price if
ignore disruptions caused by the coronavirus pandemic. To ensure accurate responses, participants
2019, and the average price they paid for gas in 2019. We asked about 2019 because we wanted to
residence, the number of miles they (and anyone else in their household) drove their primary car in
have a car; people who did not were screened out. Participants were then asked their state of
Introductory questions. The experiment began by asking people whether they currently
like.
quality than typical survey panels that allow anyone to opt in and take as many surveys as they
three surveys per month. This design makes AmeriSpeak more plausibly representative and higher
in an effort to minimize refusals. To minimize fatigue, panelists take only an average of two to
NORC randomly selects U.S. households and recruits them by mail, telephone, and in-person visits
AmeriSpeak is a probability-based panel designed to be representative of the U.S. population.
managed by the National Opinion Research Corporation (NORC) at the University of Chicago.
Sample source. We fielded the cars experiment in April 2021 on Amerispeak, an online panel
2.1 Cars Experiment
Screenshots from the two experiments are available in Appendix B.
3. an endline MPL with information labels.
2. a baseline multiple price list (MPL) that elicits relative valuations of the two choices, and
1. introductory questions,

14
were told that “Cars that meet SmartWay Vehicle standards for fuel economy and environmental
relatively low emissions of greenhouse gases and local air pollutants. In this condition, participants
The SmartWay label is an official EPA environmental certification given to vehicles that have
driven and gasoline prices that you told us earlier.”
participants were told that “the fuel cost numbers for each car are based on the annual miles
were calculated using each respondent’s 2019 miles driven and gas price. In this condition, the
The personalized cost label has the same format as the average cost label, but the numbers
Legacy, assuming 15,000 miles driven per year and a gas price of per gallon.
$2.87
annual fuel costs are for the 23-MPG Fusion and for the 30-MPG Accord, Altima, and
$1850 $1450
dealerships” and that they “report averages for each car at typical usage patterns.” The EPA’s
ipants were told that the labels “are part of the labels that must be posted on car windows at
Agency’s official “Fuel Economy and Environment” label. In these treatment conditions, partic-
The full MPG and average cost labels were taken from the U.S. Environmental Protection
the four labels.
personalized fuel cost label, SmartWay label, and no label (control). Panel (a) of Figure 2 presents
There were five randomly assigned treatment conditions: full MPG label, average cost label,
characteristics.
of an endline binary choice screen, including each car’s picture, a fuel economy label, and key
fuel economy information labels just below the cars’ pictures. Figure A3 presents an example
valued one at baseline now valued the other. Second, participants were randomly assigned to see
MPLs, with two exceptions. First, we exchanged the Accord and Legacy, so people who had
Endline MPLs with information labels. The endline MPLs were identical to the baseline
response.
or low “off-MPL” WTPs, we impute the median off-MPL WTP instead of using each individual’s
were asked to report their maximum or minimum WTP in an open-answer box. For those high
People who were willing to pay less than or more than for the car on the left
$100. $500 $3500
reaching as low as or as high as until a person’s relative WTP was determined within
$500 $3500,
of the car on the left began at per year and would adjust for each subsequent question,
$2000
In the adaptive MPL, the price of the car on the right was always per year. The price
$2000
and (iii) which car appeared on the left or right for each MPL.
Altima-Fusion or Accord/Legacy-Fusion MPL was first, (ii) which of the Accord/Legacy appeared,
offered a series of binary choices between two cars at different prices. We randomized (i) whether the
Fusion and for either the Accord or Legacy vs. the Fusion. We used an adaptive MPL design that
paid in 2019.” Using two baseline MPLs, we elicited people’s relative WTP for the Altima vs. the
NOT free, and the average price for the next three years will be the same as what you told us you
Baseline MPLs. Next, participants were told, “For the rest of the survey, assume that gas is
(including fuel economy), along with a link to more information on the manufacturer’s website.
in the MPLs described below, participants were shown each car’s picture and key characteristics
to write the maximum amount they’d pay per year to lease each one. In this elicitation and again

15
statistically indistinguishable from the primary estimates but are much less precise.
Appendix Table A5 shows that when we keep some or all of these 822 participants, the parameter estimates are
9
pay per year to lease one of the four cars, if gas were free, and the average relative WTP for
$2,770
which are very similar to the national averages. The average participant reported being willing to
participant reported driving about 10,800 miles and paying per gallon for gas in 2019, both of
$2.79
population, although the sample has a higher share of people with a college degree. The average
the sample in our analyses. The unweighted sample has roughly similar demographics to the US
Appendix Table A1 presents descriptive statistics. To maximize precision, we do not weight
endline WTP change. The final sample size is 1,267 participants.
9
WTP if gas is free, estimated bias (as defined below in equation (8) in the next section), or baseline-
we additionally exclude the 822 participants in the top or bottom five percent of annual gas cost,
proportion of high-quality responses and improve precision in treatment effect variance estimates,
reporting that they currently owned a car and successfully completing the survey. To increase the
Final sample. Out of 2,595 people who began the survey, 2,089 qualified for inclusion by
prefer at the price we state!”
“The bottom line is that it is in your best interest to carefully and honestly tell us which car you’d
stand all details of the incentive scheme, we also included the following language in bolded text:
Because Danz, Vesterlund and Wilson (2022) show that participants don’t always fully under-
in dollar-equivalent “AmeriPoints” through the AmeriSpeak system.
maximum possible consumer surplus achievable across all rows of all MPLs. We paid participants
that consumer surplus to be between and where and were set to the minimum and
$1 $10, $1 $10
details about how the adaptive MPL would be used to fill out the “background” MPL. We rescaled
was in their best interest to answer all questions honestly, and were given a link to a page with
the consumer surplus from the participant’s choice in that row. Participants were told that it
then randomly selected one row from all baseline and endline background MPLs and computed
responses to fill out the full “background” MPL that has one row for each possible price level. We
The adaptive MPLs did not elicit choices at all possible price levels. We used the participant’s
and the consumer surplus at price p is v̂ p. −
v̂ = f − g, (7)
The “true” value implied by those previous survey responses is
implied by the participant’s 2019 miles driven and gas price and the vehicle’s fuel economy rating.
compute this consumer surplus, we define f as the WTP if gas is free and g as the annual gas cost
to the “value” (i.e., consumer surplus) they would receive from an upcoming MPL choice. To
incentivized. Specifically, participants were told that they would be paid an amount proportional
Incentivization. Before the MPLs, participants were told that their responses would be
23-MPG Fusion is not.
have SmartWay Vehicle labels.” The three 30-MPG cars are all SmartWay vehicles, while the
performance will have SmartWay Vehicle labels. Cars that do not meet these standards will not

16
and LaCroix Lime, and Crush Orange and Bubly Orange.
Coca-Cola and LaCroix Cola, Pepsi and LaCroix Cola, Seagram’s Ginger Ale and 365 Ginger Sparkling Water, Sprite
The pairings of sugary drinks and sugar-free alternatives were: Minute Maid Lemonade and LaCroix Lemon,
11
(polyunsaturated), and eggs (cholesterol).
sure.” This question was asked about olive oil (correct answer: monounsaturated), butter (saturated), sunflower oil
possible responses were “Polyunsaturated fat,” “Monounsaturated fat,” “Saturated fat,” “Cholesterol,” and “Not
and “Not sure.” A second example is, “Which is the main type of fat present in each of these foods?” The five
sugar/sweetener?” The four possible responses were “0% fat cherry yogurt,” “Plain yogurt,” “Creamy fruit yogurt,”
One example question is, “If a person wanted to buy a yogurt at the supermarket, which would have the least
10
to a sugar-free substitute with similar flavor. As in the cars experiment, we used an adaptive
11
Using three baseline MPLs, we elicited WTP for each participant’s three favorite drinks relative
most favorite drinks and three substitutes.
and Crush. Participants were told that they would be offered a series of choices between their three
favorite to least favorite: Minute Maid Lemonade, Coca-Cola, Pepsi, Seagram’s Ginger Ale, Sprite,
of sugary drinks. The second stage began by asking people to rate six sugary drinks from most
participants to have nutrition and self-control problems at top of mind as we elicited their valuations
stage. We included this three-day delay after the bias proxy questions because we did not want
Baseline MPLs. Three days later, we sent emails inviting participants to complete the second
them.
rater reliability: people’s ratings of their own self-control line up well with their spouse’s ratings of
respectively. Allcott, Lockwood and Taubinsky (2019a) document that this question has high inter-
To construct the self-control bias proxy variable, we code those responses as 0, 1/3, 2/3, and 1,
than I should.” There were four responses: “Definitely,” “Mostly,” “Somewhat,” and “Not at all.”
of agreement with the statement, “I drink soda pop or other sugar-sweetened beverages more often
validity, sensitivity to change, and test-retest reliability. Self-control was measured by people’s level
the participant answered correctly. Kliemann et al. (2016) show that the GNKQ has high construct
health literature. The nutrition knowledge bias proxy variable is the share of the 28 questions that
10
from the General Nutrition Knowledge Questionnaire (GNKQ), which is widely used in the public
to Allcott, Lockwood and Taubinsky (2019a). Nutrition knowledge was measured with 28 questions
knowledge and self-control. The bias proxy survey questions and variable construction are identical
The first stage elicited contact information, demographic information, and bias proxies for nutrition
Introductory questions. The experiment was run in two stages separated by three days.
would charge prohibitively high prices.
needed to ship drinks to participants’ home addresses, and most online panels don’t allow this or
ads. See Appendix Figure A4 for an example ad. We recruited participants ourselves because we
Sample source. We fielded the experiment in fall 2021, recruiting participants through Facebook
2.2 Drinks Experiment
is slightly younger and less white than the control group.
that the treatment groups are balanced on observables, except that the personalized fuel cost group
the lower-MPG car from the baseline MPLs is about per year. Appendix Table A3 shows
$1,550

17
but later reduced the proportion due to logistical difficulties. Overall, we shipped drinks to 22
from either Walmart or Amazon.” We initially selected one-third of participants for incentivization
card. For those who are selected to receive drinks, we will send the drinks to your address directly
drinks. The remaining respondents will receive their entire reward in the form of an online gift
$15
of the survey questions plus an online gift card for the difference between and the price of the
$15
“20 percent of respondents will be randomly selected to receive a 12-pack of drinks they chose in one
online gift card, and that their responses would be incentivized. Specifically, participants were told,
Incentivization. Participants were told that they would receive a completion payment via
$15
elicit WTP to receive or avoid the labels.
The survey then asked participants why they did or did not want the labels and used an MPL to
chosen sugary drink]. Would you prefer to receive drink containers with that label or without it?”
drink containers. Also imagine that the computer selects you to receive the 12 pack of [a randomly
Participants were asked, “Imagine that drink manufacturers could print the above label on some
Finally, we included several questions to measure the labels’ direct psychic benefits or costs.
other designs.
the version of the stop sign label we use because it appears to have larger effects on demand than
sugary drinks (Donnelly et al. 2018; Grummon et al. 2019a). Grummon et al. (2019b) recommend
decay.” Both warning labels are taken from prior studies that found that they reduced demand for
state, “WARNING: Drinking beverages with added sugar contributes to obesity, diabetes, and tooth
drinks with added sugar. Drinks without added sugar will not have warning labels.” The labels
warning label conditions, participants were told, “Now, we will add nutritional warning labels to
that “we will add the official nutrition facts label to each drink.” In the stop sign and graphic
Before the endline choice screens, participants in the nutrition facts label condition were told
presents the three labels.
label, stop sign warning label, graphic warning label, and no label (control). Panel (b) of Figure 2
participants were shipped. There were four randomly assigned treatment conditions: nutrition facts
pictures. These labels appeared on the choice screens but were not attached to the actual drinks that
MPLs, except that participants were randomly assigned to see magnified labels next to the drinks’
Endline MPLs with information labels. The endline MPLs were identical to the baseline
instead of using each individual’s response.
cars experiment, for those high or low “off-MPL” WTPs, we impute the median off-MPL WTP
were asked to report their maximum or minimum WTP in an open-answer box. As in the
$6.80
WTP was determined within People who were willing to pay less than or more than
$0.40. $1.20
for each subsequent question, reaching as low as or as high as until a person’s relative
$1.20 $6.80,
typical market price of a 12-pack. The price of the drink on the left began at and would adjust
$4
In the adaptive MPL, the price of the drink on the right was always which is close to the
$4,
and a link to the nutrition facts.
We randomized the order of the three MPLs. Each choice screen showed the pictures of the drinks
MPL design that was still incentive-compatible because it was used to fill out a background MPL.

18
defined in equation (7): WTP if gas is free minus gas costs. The bias estimate is
ij
baseline relative WTP for the lower-MPG car in product pair j, and v̂ is the relative “true” value
ij1
incentive by valuing the lower-MPG too high or too low on the MPLs. We define w as the
the experiment: bias is the extent to which people fail to maximize their expected experimental
gasoline costs. A key advantage of our design is that we have an objective measure of bias within
In the cars experiment, we estimate biases from imperfect information about or inattention to
3.1.1 Cars Experiment
ment error.
ij ij
tively. We assume that these are noisy measures of the true γ and ϕ , with mean-zero measure-
ij ij
Both experiments deliver bias and externality estimates, which we denote as γ̂ and ϕ̂ , respec-
3.1 Bias and Externalities
experiment; see Appendix Table A6.
when we limit the sample to observations with WTP closer to the market prices at the time of the
consumers) vary over time and place. The parameter estimates are similar (although not identical)
to the precision gains, this may increase generalizability, as market prices (and thus marginal
We estimate population-level parameters instead of limiting to marginal consumers. In addition
sugary drink minus the zero-calorie drink.
harmful relative to the less harmful good—i.e., the 23-MPG car minus the 30-MPG car, and the
s ∈ {1, 2}. All relative values between two goods (valuation v, bias γ, etc.) are for the more
& Fusion, or Coke & LaCroix Cola) by j, and choice occasions (baseline or endline MPLs) by
tics used in the welfare analysis in Section 4. We index consumers by i, product pairs (e.g., Altima
This section presents reduced-form analyses of our two experiments and calculates sufficient statis-
3 Experimental Results
is slightly younger than the control group.
shows that the treatment groups are balanced on observables, except that the stop sign label group
soda drinkers who would want to receive drinks as part of the experiment. Appendix Table A3
Lockwood and Taubinsky (2019a), perhaps because our recruitment ads were designed to recruit
rating of 0.41. This latter number is lower than the US population average reported in Allcott,
US population. The average participant had a nutrition knowledge score of 0.70 and a self-control
Table A2 presents descriptive statistics. The sample is wealthier and better educated than the
sample size.
2,619 completed the second stage (including passing the second attention check); this is our final
stage (including passing the attention check) and were invited to take the second survey. Of those,
Final sample. Out of the 5,744 people who consented to participate, 3,653 completed the first
percent of participants.

19
unconfoundedness.
larger). See Allcott, Lockwood and Taubinsky (2019a) for discussion of required assumptions, including linearity and
associated with consumption ( λ̂ is larger) or if a given consumption change corresponds to more dollars (p/ζ̂ is c
i
ζ̂ = 1.39 from their Table VI. Intuitively, bias γ̂ (in dollar units) is larger if the bias proxies are more strongly c
1 of Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky’s (2019b) Table V, and we take p = ($5.23/12-pack) and
s $0.0363/ounce
price of sugary drinks, and ζ̂ > 0 is the compensated elasticity of demand. We take λ̂ = [0.854, 0.825] from column
c
Specifically, κ= λ̂p /ζ̂ , where λ̂ is the association between bias proxies and sugary drink consumption, p is the
13 s c s
effect of mileage.
consistent with that, Knittel and Sallee (2019) find that the effect of age on depreciation is about three times the
This calculation requires the assumption that depreciation is driven entirely by age, not mileage. Roughly
12
Again following Allcott, Lockwood and Taubinsky (2019a), we assume a relative externality
to consumers with lower nutrition knowledge or lower self-control.
where κ > 0 is an empirical constant. Consistent with intuition, this equation assigns more bias
13
i i
γ̂ = b b̂ κ, (10) −
V
 
the bias estimate is
than I should”). Allcott, Lockwood and Taubinsky (2019a) show that under certain assumptions,
“not at all” when asked if they “drink soda pop or other sugar-sweetened beverages more often
average value for nutritionists and dieticians in their data) and self-control of 1 (i.e. they respond
and Taubinsky (2019a), we assume that unbiased consumers have nutrition knowledge of 0.92 (the
be the nutrition knowledge and self-control of an unbiased consumer. Following Allcott, Lockwood
containing participant i’s nutrition knowledge and self-control variables from our survey. Let b
V
i
from survey measures of nutrition knowledge and self-control. We define b̂ as a two-part vector
problems. We follow Allcott, Lockwood and Taubinsky (2019a) in constructing bias estimates
In the drinks experiment, we estimate biases related to imperfect information and self-control
3.1.2 Drinks Experiment
23 30
i
ϕ̂ = χ SCC. (9) − · ·
i i  
m m
metric tons CO2 per gallon as the CO2 content of gasoline. The externality estimate is
agency Working Group on Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases (2021), and we define χ = 8.887×10
−3
miles driven. We assume a social cost of carbon (SCC), following the U.S. Government Inter-
12 $51
sumption from driving the 23-MPG car instead of the 30-MPG car, based on each participant’s 2019
Our externality estimate is the annual climate change damages from the additional gasoline con-
WTP that is too low.
ij ij
γ > 0 reflects a relative WTP above the incentive-maximizing level, while γ̂ < 0 reflects a relative
leasing a car; this also corresponds to MPL choices that maximize the actual experimental incentive.
ij
γ̂ = 0 corresponds to a relative WTP that maximizes the hypothetical consumer surplus from
ij ij1 ij
γ̂ = w − v̂ . (8)

20
of endline. Accord-Fusion at baseline followed by Legacy-Fusion at endline is defined as a separate product-pair from
In the cars experiment, recall that we randomized whether the Accord or Legacy was valued at baseline instead 15
overweight or underweight. Unfortunately, we are not aware of work that quantifies heterogeneity in this externality.
average externality, it is plausible that the externality is heterogeneous, varying by, for example, whether someone is
of the primary diseases thought to be caused by SSB consumption. While this work provides an estimate of the
(2012) estimate that 88 percent of the total medical costs of obesity are borne by third parties, and obesity is one
costs are borne by the individual, while 85 percent are covered by insurance. Similarly, Cawley and Meyerhoefer
ounce. Yong et al. (2011) estimate that for people with employer-provided insurance, about 15 percent of health
models to estimate that soda consumption increases health care costs by an average of approximately one cent per
i
Their estimate of γ̂ is derived from several earlier studies. Wang et al. (2012) use epidemiological simulation
14 e
ijs ij ij
choice occasion s depends on utility v , bias γ , and nudge effect τ . We decompose the utility
15
in Section 1, participant i’s relative WTP for the more harmful good in product pair j elicited on
other analyses we compare an individual label condition against control.) Following the framework
i
treatment condition and T = 0 for control. (We pool all label conditions in some analyses, while in
i i
biases, and treatment effects. We define T as a treatment indicator, with T = 1 for a label
Consistent with our theoretical model, our empirical model allows for heterogeneous preferences,
3.2.1 Empirical Model
and the covariance of treatment effects with bias and externalities.
In this section, we estimate the average treatment effects of labels, the variance of treatment effects,
and Externalities
3.2 Average Treatment Effect of Labels, Variance, and Covariance with Bias
of reducing distortion variance.
demand for lower-MPG cars and sugary drinks, but the heterogeneity foreshadows the importance
These results imply that nudges have average effects in the “right” direction if they reduce
about The relative externality ϕ̂ is a constant $1.22 per 12-pack.
$1.24.
i
For the drinks experiment, the average γ̂ is $2.56 per 12-pack, and the standard deviation is
ij
separate vertical line, and the standard deviation of ϕ̂ is about
$22.
ij
Allcott and Knittel 2019). The average externality estimate ϕ̂ is $50 per year, as reported in a
2013; Allcott and Wozny 2014; Sallee, West and Fan 2016; Grigolon, Reynaert and Verboven 2018;
implied by other papers using market data or field experiments (Busse, Knittel and Zettelmeyer
ij
the average γ̂ implies inattention to about 44 percent of gas costs. This is more inattention than
the higher-MPG car (given reported 2019 miles driven and gas prices) is about per year, so
$304
ij
average γ̂ is $135 per year, and the standard deviation is The average gas cost savings from
$735.
ij
reflect dispersion in (true) bias γ , measurement error, or both. For the cars experiment, the
ij
Figure 3 presents the distribution of bias estimates γ̂ for each experiment. This dispersion can
3.1.3 Bias and Externality Estimates
and product pairs.
from sugary drinks of ϕ̂ = 0.85 cents per ounce. We assume that this is constant across people
14

21
Legacy-Fusion followed by Accord-Fusion.
Combining equations (12) and (13) gives
2 1
Cov [ϕ, τ ] = α V ar ϕ̂ + α Cov γ̂, ϕ̂ . (15)
h i h i
1 2
Cov [γ, τ ] = α V ar [γ̂] + α Cov γ̂, ϕ̂ (14)
h i
By Assumption 1, Cov [γ̂, τ ] = Cov [γ, τ ] and Cov ϕ̂, τ = Cov [ϕ, τ ], and thus
h i
1 2
where η is normal and independent of γ̂, ϕ̂ , α = Cov [γ̂, τ ] /V ar [γ̂], and α = Cov ϕ̂, τ /V ar ϕ̂ .
  h i h i
ij ij 1 ij 2 ij
τ = η + α γ̂ + α ϕ̂ , (13)
ij
normal, τ can be written as
Assumptions 1 and 4 together imply that γ̂ and ϕ̂ are normally distributed. Since τ is also
assuming normality; the estimate is very similar.
An alternative strategy in Appendix D.2 delivers Cov [γ, τ ] in the drinks experiment without
elicitations.
don’t assume that the measurement error γ̂ γ is independent of the measurement errors in WTP −
are not predicted by our nutrition knowledge and self-control bias proxies. On the other hand, we
effects of nutrition facts labels don’t covary with misperceptions of calorie or sugar content that
γ̂ γ to be independent of treatment effects τ . For example, this implies that the treatment −
Perhaps the strongest assumption is the part of Assumption 1 that requires measurement error
Assumption 4. τ , γ, ϕ, and ϵ̃ are normally distributed.
Assumption 3. The idiosyncratic WTP change is orthogonal to the treatment effect : ϵ̃ ⊥ τ .
Assumption 2. The treatment is randomly assigned: T ϵ̃. ⊥
normally distributed, and independent of γ, ϕ, and τ .
Assumption 1. The measurement errors in bias and externality, γ̂−γ and ϕ̂−ϕ, are mean-zero,
We make the following assumptions, which deliver a standard mixed effects model.
ij ij i ij
w̃ = τ · T + ϵ̃ . (12)
ij ij2 ij1
For example, w̃ := w − w . Differencing equation (11) gives
We use the tilde (˜) to indicate differences between the baseline and endline choice occasions.
ijs ij ij ij i ijs
w = v + γ + τ T 1[s = 2] + ϵ . (11) · ·
the Accord and Legacy. This implies that relative WTP is
capturing taste variation, elicitation noise, or (in the cars experiment) the WTP difference between
ijs ij ijs ij ijs
as v = v + ϵ , where v is a stable person-specific component and ϵ is an idiosyncratic shock

22
1 2
The coefficients are β = Cov [γ̂, ϵ̃] /V ar [γ̂] and β = Cov ϕ̂, ϵ̃ /V ar ϕ̂ .
16
h i h i
(12), for each label in each experiment. The left-most bars for each label are the average treatment
Figure 5 presents average treatment effect (ATE) estimates using the OLS version of equation
and a significant V ar [τ ], since the effect of the label on dispersion of w̃ is what identifies V ar [τ ].
E
and more weight throughout the left tails. In both experiments, we should thus expect [τ ] < 0
free drinks). The treatment distributions are also more dispersed, with less weight on change
$0
WTP for lower-MPG cars (relative to higher-MPG cars) and for sugary drinks (relative to sugar-
experiments, the treatment distributions are shifted to the left, implying that the labels reduced
and product pairs in each experiment, pooling treatment group data across all labels. In both
ij
Figure 4 presents the treatment and control group distributions of WTP changes w̃ across people
Before presenting formal regression results, we present figures that illustrate the identification.
3.2.2 Descriptive Figures and Intuition for Identification
statistics.
fusion in the experiment) that affects both groups does not bias our estimate of V ar [τ ] or other
control difference in WTP dispersion, idiosyncratic elicitation noise (e.g., from boredom or con-
Since the mixed effects model identifies treatment effect heterogeneity from the treatment –
adding controls. In all regressions, we include indicators for product pairs j and MPL order.
Because equations (12)–(18) also hold conditional on controls, we can improve precision by
using equations (14) and (15).
bution of bias and externality estimates, we then recover the covariances [γ, τ ] , Cov [ϕ, τ ]} {Cov
variances and covariance V ar[γ̂], V ar ϕ̂ , Cov γ̂, ϕ̂ computed directly from the sample distri-
n h i h io
1 2
equation (18) via mixed effects. Then, using the estimated regression coefficients , α and the {α }
likelihood estimator. Using orthogonality and normality from Assumptions 1–4, we also estimate
Assumptions 2 and 3, we estimate V ar [τ ] using equation (12) in a standard mixed effects maximum
ij i
squares, i.e. by simply regressing w̃ on T and a constant. Using orthogonality and normality from
E
Using Assumptions 1 and 2, we estimate [τ ] using equation (12) with fixed τ in ordinary least
ij ij i 1 ij i 2 ij i 1 ij 2 ij 0i ij
w̃ = η T + α γ̂ T + α ϕ̂ T + β γ̂ + β ϕ̂ + β + ν . (18)
normally distributed. Combining equations (16) and (17) gives a mixed effects model:
0i ij 0i ij
imply that β + ν is normally distributed, and we additionally assume that β and ν are each
0i ij
where β is an individual-level constant and the residual ν is mean-zero. Our assumptions
16
ij 1 ij 2 ij 0i ij
ϵ̃ = β γ̂ + β ϕ̂ + β + ν , (17)
ij ij ij
A linear projection of ϵ̃ on γ̂ and ϕ̂ gives
ij ij i 1 ij i 2 ij i ij
w̃ = η T + α γ̂ T + α ϕ̂ T + ϵ̃ . (16)

23
from the experiment in Allcott and Knittel (2019).
the (statistically insignificant) effects of fuel cost information provision on actual vehicle purchases
p
E
market share by about [τ ] D ≈ 4 percentage points. This is within the confidence intervals of
′
Section 4.2, a homogeneous treatment effect of that magnitude would reduce the lower-MPG car’s
relative WTP for the lower-MPG car of per vehicle-year. Using the demand slope reported in
$59
E
From column 1, the average treatment effect [τ ] for fuel economy labels is a reduction in
mixed effects.
random coefficient (mixed effects) models. The coefficients are very similar between OLS and
(OLS) versions of equations (12) and (16), respectively, while columns 3 and 4 present the full
Table 1 presents results with data pooled across all labels. Columns 1 and 2 present fixed coefficient
3.2.3 Parameter Estimates
suggest they want the most help.
other words, graphic warning labels have the smallest effects on the people whose survey responses
people who say that they “mostly,” “somewhat,” or “not at all” drink more than they should. In
people who say they “definitely” drink sugary drinks “more often that I should” than they are for
especially true for the graphic warning labels: those effects are almost three times smaller for
below-median self-control, which pushes towards increasing the variance of distortions. This is
variance of distortions. However, the labels have significantly smaller effects for consumers with
effects for consumers with below-median nutrition knowledge, which pushes toward decreasing the
proxies. Although not statistically different, the point estimates suggest that the labels have larger
Appendix Figure A8 analyzes treatment effect heterogeneity separately for the two types of bias
Recall that for sugary drinks, we assume that the externality ϕ is constant across consumers.
suggest slightly smaller effects for more biased consumers, implying slightly positive Cov [γ̂, τ ].
pooling across the three sugary drink labels in the right-most set of results, the point estimates
facts label might generate larger total surplus gains despite having smaller average effects. When
consumers. These differences are not statistically significant, but they suggest that the nutrition
Cov [γ̂, τ ]. The nutrition facts label has smaller ATE but larger point estimates for more biased
label has the largest ATE, but it has smaller effects for more biased consumers, implying a positive
For the drinks experiment, there is some suggestive evidence of tradeoffs. The graphic warning
difference is highly statistically insignificant.
analogous to Davis and Metcalf (2016). Our point estimates are consistent with this, but the
drivers and smaller for light drivers, which could have generated larger effect sizes for heavy drivers,
across labels. For the personalized cost label, the cost differences presented are larger for heavy
For the cars experiment, the ATEs and conditional ATEs are statistically indistinguishable
imply a more negative Cov [δ, τ ], and thus a reduction in the variance of distortions.
ing the ATE and V ar [τ ] constant, a more negative effect for above-median distortions δ̂ would
product pair observations with below-median or above-median bias or externality estimates. Hold-
E
effects [τ ]. The remaining bars present conditional ATEs within the sample of participant-by-

24
Figure 6 presents average WTP by label. The average person in our sample wants to receive
reminders about health even after buying the drinks.
disgusting or otherwise aversive, or it could be positive if consumers value the hard information or
1
the sugary drink, and q (σ = 1) is the equilibrium quantity. ι could be negative if the label is
∗
1 1
the labels are I(σ, p) = σῑ q (σ = 1), where ῑ is the average psychic benefit conditional on buying
∗
0
sugar-free drinks experience no psychic benefits or costs (ι = 0), so aggregate psychic benefits with
receive or avoid receiving labels on a 12-pack of sugary drinks. We assume that those who buy
(∆I = 0). For the drinks experiment, we use the MPL questions eliciting hypothetical WTP to
For the cars experiment, the labels are not very evocative, so we assume zero psychic benefit
3.3 Psychic Benefits and Costs
graphical results in Figure 5.
nificantly more positive Cov [γ, τ ] than the nutrition facts label, consistent with the suggestive
experiments. One key result that differs across labels is that the graphic warning label has sig-
Appendix D.1 presents versions of Table 1 specific to each of the seven labels across the two
estimate is Cov[γ, τ ] 0.08 1.24 0.13 ($/12-pack) . ≈ × ≈ 2 2
From Section 3.1, the standard deviation of γ̂ is $1.24 per 12-pack. Thus, the covariance point
1
For the drinks experiment, α ≈ 0.08, which is statistically significantly different from zero.
the covariance point estimates are Cov[γ, τ ] -7,744 and Cov[ϕ, τ ] -37 ($/vehicle) . ≈ ≈ 2
the standard deviations of γ̂ and ϕ̂ are and per year. Thus, using equations (14) and (15),
$735 $22
of which are statistically indistinguishable from zero, and Cov γ̂, ϕ̂ 2,384. From Section 3.1, ≈
h i
i 1 2
interacted with T , in mixed effects. For the cars experiment, α ≈ −0.01 and α ≈ −0.007, both
1 2
Column 4 presents the primary estimate of , α the coefficients on bias or externality {α },
implying a standard deviation of and a coefficient of variation of about 2.0.
$0.86
( V ar[τ ]/E [τ ]) of about 3.0. The variance of sugary drink label effects is 0.74 ($/12-pack) ,
p 2
year) , implying a standard deviation of per vehicle-year, and thus a coefficient of variation
2 $174
From column 3, the variance of fuel economy label effects is V ar [τ ] 30,428 ($/vehicle- ≈
and Chater 2017; Thaler and Sunstein 2021).
nudges don’t generate enough behavior change to eliminate the need for taxation (e.g., Loewenstein
experiment. This is consistent with the view that in markets with material externality problems,
externality in the cars experiment, and labels offset only 0.43/(2.56 + 1.22) ≈ 11% in the drinks
bias and externalities. This offset is only partial: labels offset 59/(135 + 50) 32% of the bias + ≈
effects offset the suboptimally high purchases of low-MPG vehicles and sugary drinks caused by
Both fuel economy and health labels have average effects in the “right” direction: the average
demand in Grummon et al. (2019a) and Hall et al. (2022), respectively.
than the 10 and 17 percentage point effects of stop sign and graphic warning labels on sugary drink
reduce the sugary drink’s market share by about 6 percentage points. This is somewhat smaller
per 12-pack. Using the demand slope, a homogeneous treatment effect of that magnitude would
The ATE for sugary drink labels is a reduction in relative WTP for the sugary drink of
$0.43

25
of σ [0, 1]. ∈
Without this assumption, we would need to integrate the first-order condition in Proposition 1 across all values
17
respectively, are:
E
implies that the total surplus changes from the nudge at t = 0 and at optimal tax t = [δ + στ ]−µ,
∗
When we make the assumptions above, expand the second moment, and rearrange, Proposition 1
for the quantitative analyses.
Proposition 1 holds after replacing γ with δ. We also assume zero psychic benefits/costs (I = 0)
Because covariances are bilinear, Cov [δ, τ ] = Cov [γ, τ ] + Cov [ϕ, τ ]. As described in Section 1.1,
We explicitly add an externality ϕ to the bias γ, and we define δ := γ + ϕ as their sum.
parameters approximate the marginal parameters.
As noted in Section 3, we increase precision and generalizability by assuming that the population
1) X(σ = 0) for any function X(σ). −
that the moments are locally linear in σ. We define a difference operator ∆X(σ) := X(σ =
17
the question of whether or not to have labels. To easily apply Proposition 1 to this case, we assume
In our empirical applications, we consider a binary nudge intensity, σ ∈ {0, 1}, corresponding to
4.1 Implementation of Proposition 1.3
variance relative to average treatment effects.
than we measure, this would strengthen the qualitative conclusion of the importance of distortion
wanted them to choose in any particular way. If the true treatment effects of labels are smaller
demand effects by carefully designing the experiments to avoid signaling to participants that we
they perceived that the experimenter wants them to. We tried to minimize any such experimenter
It is theoretically possible that participants felt compelled to respond more to the labels because
4 Welfare Analysis
this was because “the label is gross.”
Another large minority of people who wanted to avoid the graphic warning labels reported that
a large minority of people reported that “I don’t need the government to tell me what to drink.”
to avoid receiving the labels reported that this was because “the label makes me feel bad,” although
reported that this was because “it would remind me to drink less.” The modal person who wanted
is useful,” while the minority of people who wanted to receive the graphic warning label mostly
nutrition and stop sign labels mostly reported that this was because “the information on the label
receive each label, as elicited from multiple choice questions. People who wanted to receive the
Appendix Figure A9 presents the distribution of reasons why people did or did not want to
labels, average WTP is almost exactly zero.
about to avoid receiving a 12-pack with the graphic warning labels. Pooling across all three
$1
positive for the stop sign label. The average person in our sample reported being willing to pay
the nutrition label and reported being willing to pay for it on a 12-pack. Average WTP is also
$2

26
(2021), Seiler, Tuchman and Yao (2021), Petimar et al. (2022)
The papers are Falbe et al. (2015), Silver et al. (2017), Cawley et al. (2018), Cawley et al. (2020), Bleich et al. 19
(2017).
The papers are Busse, Silva-Risso and Zettelmeyer (2006), Sallee (2011), and Gulati, McAusland and Sallee
18
rate to untaxed beverages is 0.05, giving ρ ≈ 0.85 − 0.05 ≈ 0.80.
the U.S. The average pass-through rate to taxed beverages is 0.85, and the average pass-through
19
For sugary drinks, we collect estimates from seven papers that study city-level sugary drink taxes in
4.3.2 Drinks Experiment
µ = 0.
Since prices and cost structures are similar for our 23-MPG versus 30-MPG sedans, we assume
assume ρ 0.8 as a rough benchmark. ≈
prices of other vehicles as controls. The average pass-through rate is approximately 0.8, so we
18
pass-through rates for hybrid vehicle subsidies and manufacturers’ customer rebates, which use the
those sedans vs. 30-MPG sedans. As a proxy, we collect estimates from three papers studying
There are no papers that specifically study how taxes on 23-MPG sedans are passed through to
4.3.1 Cars Experiment
the less harmful good. The markup µ is the relative markup on the more versus less harmful good.
pass-through of a tax on the more harmful good to the price of the more harmful good relative to
form the sufficient statistics for welfare analysis; see Appendix A.4. The pass-through rate ρ is the
When there are two or more goods, it is the difference in markups and pass-through rates that
4.3 Pass-Through and Markup Assumptions
respectively.
$/12-pack,
and drinks experiments are −0.00060 market share per and −0.14 market share per
$/vehicle-year
good, as illustrated in Appendix Figure A7. The average demand slopes for the fuel economy
We pool across all product pairs to construct an average demand function for the more harmful
4.2 Demand Slope
parameters and then present total surplus effects.
E E
We take [δ], [τ ], V ar [τ ], and Cov [δ, τ ] from Section 3. Below, we discuss the remaining
2
p
∆W (t = t ) ≈ {2Cov [δ, τ ] + V ar [τ ]} D . (20)
∗ ′
1
2
p
E
∆W (t = 0) ρ (E [δ] µ + [τ ]) (E [δ] µ) + 2Cov [δ, τ ] + V ar [τ ] D (19) ≈ − − −
2 2 ′
n   o
1

27
The three papers are Falbe et al. (2015), Cawley et al. (2020), and Seiler, Tuchman and Yao (2021).
20
compared to the bias and externality. With no tax, health labels increase total surplus in our model,
In the drinks experiment, the point estimates of the variance and covariance are much smaller
small average treatment effects.
p
prices of per vehicle-year (Brozic 2022). This is driven by the modest demand slope D and
$5,600 ′
reduces total surplus. In all cases, the estimated total surplus effects are small relative to lease
aggregate quantity, the labels’ average effect is irrelevant, and the increase in distortion variance
paired with the optimal tax. Intuitively, since the tax allows the government to optimally control
The final row of Table 2 shows that fuel economy labels reduce total surplus when they are
misallocation is quantitatively important for welfare.
cases show that the labels add substantial noise to consumer choice in our experiment, and this
importance of average behavior change, which drives the overall total surplus gain. The latter two
estimated V ar [τ ] would decrease total surplus by per vehicle-year. The first case shows the
$9.07
vehicle-year. Third, “pure noise” labels with zero average effect and Cov [δ, τ ] = 0 and the same
(E[τ ] = 0) and the same estimated Cov [δ, τ ] and V ar [τ ] would decrease total surplus by per
$4.43
would increase total surplus by per vehicle-year. Second, labels with zero average effect
$4.36
E[τ
First, labels with homogeneous effects (Cov [δ, τ ] = V ar [τ ] = 0) and the same estimated ]
terms inside brackets, which correspond to the three economic forces described in Section 1.3.
Three special cases reported near the bottom of Table 2 illustrate the importance of the three
Thus, the point estimates suggest that fuel economy labels decrease total surplus in our experiment.
0.07 ≈ −
$/vehicle-year.
2
(184 + 0.80 −59) (184) + 2 (−7, 781) + 30, 428 (−0.00060) (22) ≈ − 2 2
n   o
1
2
p
E
∆W (t = 0) ≈ ρ (E [δ] + [τ ]) − (E [δ]) + 2Cov [δ, τ ] + V ar [τ ] D (21)
2 2 ′
n   o
1
-7,744 + equation (19) is −37,
E E E
no tax. Using µ = 0, [δ] = [γ] + [ϕ] = 135 + 50, and Cov [δ, τ ] = Cov [γ, τ ] + Cov [ϕ, τ ] =
To demonstrate the computation, consider the total surplus effect of fuel economy labels with
precision.
tions (19) and (20). We initially pool across labels in each experiment to simplify and increase
Table 2 summarizes the sufficient statistics and resulting total surplus effects obtained from equa-
4.4 Results
markups on the two goods, implying a relative markup of µ = 0.
drinks versus sparkling water, they have very similar cost structures. Thus, we assume similar
relatively similar. While there is no public information on the marginal costs of 12-packs of sugary
Three of these seven papers report prices for both sugary drinks and water. The prices are
20

28
from the seven soda tax papers (from footnote 19) could imply relative pass-through from ρ = 0.16
through estimates (from footnote 18) range from 0.57 to 1, while different combinations of estimates
average demand, offsetting the distortion from bias and externalities. Our three auto market pass-
to optimally set aggregate quantity. At t = 0, pass-through does matter because the labels decrease
pass-through does not affect the total surplus effect of labels because the government uses the tax
because optimal taxes and labels are substitutes at our parameter values. At the optimal tax,
surplus. The optimal tax increases total surplus as ρ increases, especially without labels, again
At ρ = 0, implying perfectly inelastic supply, taxes do not affect equilibrium quantity or total
The left panels in Figure 8 show how total surplus effects depend on pass-through assumptions.
fuel economy labels would significantly reduce total surplus.
would be preferred to optimal taxes. If Cov [δ, τ ] had the same magnitude but opposite sign, the
the cars experiment, if Cov [δ, τ ] were twice as large as our point estimates, fuel economy labels
In both experiments, plausible differences in Cov [δ, τ ] again substantially affect total surplus. In
Cov [δ, τ ] implies that a larger share of the assumed variance of treatment effects is well-targeted.
parameters. The total surplus gains from labels are declining in Cov [δ, τ ], because a more negative
The right panels in Figure 7 plot ∆W as a function of Cov [δ, τ ], holding constant the other
larger values of V ar [τ ].
decrease in average demand reduces the average net distortion, but they decrease total surplus at
drinks experiment at t = 0, labels increase total surplus at small values of V ar [τ ] because the
the average net distortion is large relative to the average treatment effect of the labels. In the
In the drinks experiment, optimal taxes are preferred to labels at most plausible values because
that the optimal tax would increase it.
fuel economy labels generate substantial misallocation, reducing total surplus by about the amount
be preferred to optimal taxes at small values of V ar [τ ]. By contrast, at twice the estimated V ar [τ ],
V ar [τ ]. In the cars experiment, the negative Cov [δ, τ ] implies that fuel economy labels might even
all else equal. In both experiments, total surplus gains differ significantly for plausible values of
labels are declining in V ar [τ ] because the variance of distortions is lower at lower values of V ar[τ ],
function of V ar [τ ], holding constant the other parameters in Table 2. The total surplus gains from
The left panels in Figure 7 illustrate one basic insight from Proposition 1 by plotting ∆W as a
7 with respect to V ar [τ ] and Cov [δ, τ ].
p
E
only on D and the average marginal net distortion [δ + στ ] − µ, so those lines are flat in Figure
′
gains from labels are smaller with optimal taxes. Total surplus gains from optimal taxes depend
substitutes: total surplus gains from optimal taxes are smaller with the labels, and total surplus
p
t is t D . In both experiments, the labels reduce the net distortion, so taxes and labels are − ∗ 12 ∗2 ′
parameter values. Assuming locally linear demand, the total surplus gain from the optimal tax
Figures 7 and 8 illustrate how the total surplus effects of labels and taxes depend on different
their high variance and positive covariance with bias.
the labels reduce total surplus in our model because they increase the distortion variance, due to
again primarily because the labels have average effects in the “right” direction. At the optimal tax,

29
to minimize demand effects by carefully designing the experiments to avoid signaling to participants
respond more to the labels because they perceived that the experimenter wanted them to. We tried
reason is experimenter demand effects: it is theoretically possible that participants felt compelled to
Our exact parameter estimates are unlikely to generalize outside our experiments. One potential
effects can be an incomplete and possibly misleading proxy for welfare.
and externalities that motivate those labels in the first place. These results illustrate how average
uct labels could have highly heterogeneous effects that are not well-targeted at the consumer biases
nudges affect the variance of distortions. Our empirical results suggest that commonly used prod-
nudges have average effects in the “right” direction, we show that welfare also depends on how
ular over the past two decades. While much of the empirical literature has focused on whether
Simplified information provision, warning labels, and other nudges have become increasingly pop-
5 Discussion and Conclusion
total surplus losses from graphic warning labels.
quantified in Section 3.3 would imply large total surplus gains from nutrition facts labels and large
the graphic labels generate lower total surplus gains. Adding the large psychic benefits and costs
the increased distortion variance (larger V ar [τ ] and significantly larger Cov [γ, τ ]) implies that
although graphic warning labels on sugary drinks have larger ATEs than the nutrition facts labels,
effects are mostly statistically indistinguishable across labels. The point estimates suggest that
Appendix Table A14 presents label-specific point estimates. The parameters and total surplus
with and without labels.
E
optimal tax adjusts to offset that distortion. The gains from optimal taxes are convex in [δ], both
E
distortion. With the optimal tax, the net benefits from labels are invariant to [δ], because the
E
benefits from labels increase in [δ], as the average behavior change offsets an increasingly large
E
shows how total surplus depends on the average bias + externality [δ]. Without a tax, the net
Any estimates of bias and externalities are at least somewhat uncertain. Appendix Figure A10
harmful good.
is more beneficial with an additional pre-existing distortion that decreases the price of the more
total surplus effect of labels is decreasing in µ, as the average demand decrease caused by the labels
on the markup, because the tax rate can be set to offset any markup difference. At t = 0, the
surplus effect is zero at t = 0. At the optimal tax, the total surplus effects of labels do not depend
∗
taxes are quadratic in µ because µ directly determines the net distortion, and the minimum total
lease a car for one year (Brozic 2022) and for a 12-pack of drinks. The welfare effects of optimal
$4
we divide the markup difference µ by benchmark estimates of average prices of each good: to
$5,600
The right panels in Figure 8 show how the markup affects total surplus. To ease interpretation,
change the sign.
of those ranges would significantly change the magnitude of total surplus effects and could even
to ρ = 1.37. In both experiments when t = 0, using estimates from the lower versus higher ends

30
average behavior.
behavioral scientists can work together to design nudges that will increase welfare, not just change
In conclusion, we hope that this analysis provides a template for how economists and other
for welfare when taxes are far from optimal, perhaps due to political or technical constraints.
tive policies are already close to optimal. On the other hand, average effects are more important
offset by equilibrium price changes. Second, average effects matter less when taxes or other correc-
matter less in markets with lower pass-through rates, because demand changes in those markets are
variance could be especially important relative to average treatment effects. First, average effects
Our theoretical results provide guidance on the market settings in which effects on distortion
about their neighbors’ energy use.
example, one might again expect considerable heterogeneity in how people react to information
also apply to nudges other than product labels, such as defaults and social comparisons. For
consumers who are unfamiliar with units such as miles per gallon or grams of sugar. Our insights
rotting teeth. However, precise informational labels can also be (mis)interpreted differently by
obvious how much a SmartWay vehicle label should be worth, or how much soda would cause
information about the magnitude of a potential harm. In our experiment, for example, it’s not
it differently for idiosyncratic reasons. For example, many warning labels don’t provide precise
distortion variance. Intuitively, however, a nudge will have noisy effects if different people interpret
Our analysis does not provide clear guidance around what kinds of nudges are likely to increase
whether a nudge has larger effects for consumers thought to have larger biases or externalities.
full welfare analysis, researchers can also provide descriptive evidence on targeting by estimating
and then relate consumers’ demand changes to their bias proxies elicited on surveys. Short of a
one could estimate consumer-level changes in purchases before versus after labels are introduced,
and (ii) individual-level bias estimates. For example, to evaluate health labels in grocery stores,
covariance statistics are (i) within-person measurement of demand both with and without the nudge,
provide a template for other designs that can be. The key ingredients for measuring the variance and
While our exact experimental designs can’t be implemented in more naturalistic settings, they
treatment effect heterogeneity relative to average effects is likely to be robust.
relative to average effects. Thus, we think that the qualitative conclusion about the importance of
change the average effect sizes, it’s not clear what would inflate treatment effect heterogeneity
affect whether and how consumers process the labels. While these and other differences could
average effects and decrease heterogeneity, because it removes distractions that could differentially
of being in an actual store. If anything, the simplified experimental choice setting might increase
simplified, with two options instead of many, clearly emphasized labels, and none of the distractions
A second reason why parameter estimates are unlikely to generalize is that the choice setting was
distortion variance relative to average treatment effects.
smaller than we measure, this would strengthen the qualitative conclusion of the importance of
that we wanted them to choose in any particular way. If the true treatment effects of labels are

31
Invest More in Nudging?,” Psychological Science, 2017, 28 (8), 1041–1055.
Maya Shankar, Will Tucker-Ray, William J. Congdon, and Steven Galing, “Should Governments
Benartzi, Shlomo, John Beshears, Katherine L. Milkman, Cass R. Sunstein, Richard H. Thaler,
2022.
, , , and Joshua Kim, “On the Design of Food Labeling Policies,” Available at SSRN 4079728,
Policies,” Econometrica, 2023, 91 (3), 839–868.
Barahona, Nano, Cristobal Otero, and Sebastian Otero, “Equilibrium Effects of Food Labeling
The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 2015, 15 (4), 1619–1655.
Bao, Jiayi and Benjamin Ho, “Heterogeneous Effects of Informational Nudges on Pro-social Behavior,”
Effects on Consumer Behavior,” Marketing Science, 2022, 41 (5).
Araya, Sebastian, Andres Elberg, Carlos Noton, and Daniel Schwartz, “Identifying Food Labeling
112 (11), 3584–3626.
petence: A Simple Method with an Application to Financial Choice,” American Economic Review, 2022,
Ambuehl, Sandro, B. Douglas Bernheim, and Annamaria Lusardi, “Evaluating Deliberative Com-
Spillovers,” Review of Economic Studies, 2022, 89 (5), 2293–2328.
Altmann, Steffen, Andreas Grunewald, and Jonas Radbruch, “Interventions and Cognitive
iment on charitable giving,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 2022, 200, 959–972.
Alt, Marius and Carlo Gallier, “Incentives and intertemporal behavioral spillovers: A two-period exper-
2019.
Effects of Informed School Choice,” Working Paper 2019-16, Princeton University Economics Department.
Allende, Claudia, Francisco Gallego, and Christopher Neilson, “Approximating The Equilibrium
An Overview of Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2019, 33 (3), 202–27.
, Benjamin B. Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky, “Should We Tax Sugar-Sweetened Beverages?
the Optimal Soda Tax,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2019, 134 (3), 1557–1626.
, Benjamin B Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky, “Regressive Sin Taxes, With an Application to
Evidence from Energy Conservation,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (10), 3003–37.
and Todd Rogers, “The Short-Run and Long-Run Effects of Behavioral Interventions: Experimental
Experiment,” Management Science, 2017, 63 (1), 21–39.
and Richard L. Sweeney, “The Role of Sales Agents in Information Disclosure: Evidence from a Field
and Statistics, 2014, 96 (5), 779–795.
and Nathan Wozny, “Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy Paradox,” Review of Economics
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2019, 11 (1), 236–76.
and Judd B Kessler, “The Welfare Effects of Nudges: A Case Study of Energy Use Social Comparisons,”
Lightbulb Market,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (8), 2501–38.
and Dmitry Taubinsky, “Evaluating Behaviorally Motivated Policy: Experimental Evidence from the
Two Experiments,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2019, 11 (1), 1–37.
and Christopher Knittel, “Are Consumers Poorly Informed about Fuel Economy? Evidence from
, “Site Selection Bias in Program Evaluation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (3), 1117–1165.
1082–1095.
Allcott, Hunt, “Social Norms and Energy Conservation,” Journal of Public Economics, 2011, 95 (9-10),
References

32
Approach,” Journal of Health Economics, 2012, 31 (1), 219–230.
Cawley, John and Chad Meyerhoefer, “The Medical Care Costs of Obesity: An Instrumental Variables
“Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (4), 1639–1674.
Carroll, Gabriel D, James J Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C Madrian, and Andrew Metrick,
Experiment,” PLoS One, 2013, 8 (1), e52206.
Warning Labels Across Socioeconomic, Race and Ethnic Groups: Results from a Randomized Web-based
Larry R Muenz, David Y He, and Kasisomayajula Viswanath, “Impact of Tobacco-Related Health
Cantrell, Jennifer, Donna M Vallone, James F Thrasher, Rebekah H Nagler, Shari P Feirman,
University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 2003, 151 (3), 1211–1254.
bin, “Regulation for Conservatives: Behavioral Economics and the Case for ’Asymmetric Paternalism’,”
Camerer, Colin, Samuel Issacharoff, George Loewenstein, Ted O’Donoghue, and Matthew Ra-
Welfare Effects of Shame and Pride,” American Economic Review, 2022, 112 (1), 122–168.
Butera, Luigi, Robert Metcalfe, William Morrison, and Dmitry Taubinsky, “Measuring the
Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (1), 220–56.
Busse, Meghan R., Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer, “Are Consumers Myopic?
of Auto Manufacturer Promotions,” American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (4), 1253–1270.
Busse, Meghan, Jorge Silva-Risso, and Florian Zettelmeyer, “$1,000 Cash Back: The Pass-Through
2329–2353.
Nudges: Evidence from a Field Experiment in the Workplace,” The Economic Journal, 2020, 130 (632),
Bulte, Erwin, John List, and Daan van Soest, “Toward an Understanding of the Welfare Effects of
//www.creditkarma.com/auto/i/cost-to-lease-a-car.
https: Brozic, Jennifer, “How Much Does it Cost to Lease a Car?,” Credit Karma, 2022. Available at
Smoking Behavior: A Randomized Clinical Trial,” JAMA Internal Medicine, 2016, 176 (7), 905–912.
Bach, Sean Hanley, and Kurt M Ribisl, “Effect of Pictorial Cigarette Pack Warnings on Changes in
Brewer, Noel T, Marissa G Hall, Seth M Noar, Humberto Parada, Al Stein-Seroussi, Laura E
ican Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2011, 3 (1), 91–128.
Bollinger, Bryan, Phillip Leslie, and Alan Sorensen, “Calorie Posting in Chain Restaurants,” Amer-
at Independent Stores in Philadelphia,” 2021, 4 (6), e2113527–e2113527.
Roberto, “Association of a Sweetened Beverage Tax With Purchases of Beverages and High-Sugar Foods
man, Nandita Mitra, Caitlin M. Lowery, Ana Peterhans, Sophia V. Hua, and Christina A.
Bleich, Sara N., Caroline G. Dunn, Mark J. Soto, Jiali Yan, Laura A. Gibson, Hannah G. Law-
3489–3529.
Social Benefits: Evidence from an IRS Field Experiment,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (11),
Bhargava, Saurabh and Dayanand Manoli, “Psychological Frictions and the Incomplete Take-Up of
70 (3), 1161–1201.
“The Effect of Providing Peer Information on Retirement Savings Decisions,” Journal of Finance, 2015,
Beshears, John, James J Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C Madrian, and Katherine L Milkman,
American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (9), 2798–2837.
, Andrey Fradkin, and Igor Popov, “The Welfare Economics of Default Options in 401(k) Plans,”
Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foundations,” Vol. 1, Elsevier, 2018, pp. 381–516.
Bernheim, B Douglas and Dmitry Taubinsky, “Behavioral Public Economics,” in “Handbook of

33
eds., Handbook of Behavioral Economics, Vol. 2, Elsevier, 2019, pp. 261–343.
Gabaix, Xavier, “Behavioral Inattention,” in Douglas Bernheim, Stefano DellaVigna, and David Laibson,
from SNAP,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2019, 134 (3), 1505–1556.
Finkelstein, Amy and Matthew J Notowidigdo, “Take-Up and Targeting: Experimental Evidence
Review, 2020, 110 (1), 298–336.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Xavier Gabaix, “Optimal Taxation with Behavioral Agents,” American Economic
American Journal of Public Health, 2015, 105 (11), 2194–2201. PMID: 26444622.
of Sugar-Sweetened Beverages 3 Months After Implementation of an Excise Tax in Berkeley, California,”
Falbe, Jennifer, Nadia Rojas, Anna H. Grummon, and Kristine A. Madsen, “Higher Retail Prices
No. 26595.
Exley, Christine L and Judd B Kessler, “Motivated Errors,” NBER Working Paper, 2019. NBER WP
on Sugary-Drink Purchasing,” Psychological Science, 2018, 29 (8), 1321–1333.
Donnelly, Grant E, Laura Y Zatz, Dan Svirsky, and Leslie K John, “The Effect of Graphic Warnings
2013, 61, 729–739.
Conservation Behavior: A Meta-analysis of Experimental Studies From 1975 to 2012,” Energy Policy,
Delmas, Magali A., Miriam Fischlein, and Omar I. Asensio, “Information Strategies and Energy
Units,” Econometrica, 2022, 90, 81–116.
DellaVigna, Stefano and Elizabeth Linos, “RCTs to Scale: Comprehensive Evidence from Two Nudge
Imperfect Competition,” Journal of Public Economics, 1992, 49 (3), 351–367.
Delipalla, Sofia and Michael Keen, “The Comparison Between Ad Valorem and Specific Taxation Under
2016, 3 (3), 589–625.
from Energy-efficiency Labels,” Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists,
Davis, Lucas W and Gilbert E Metcalf, “Does Better Information Lead to Better Choices? Evidence
Compatibility,” American Economic Review, 2022, 112 (9).
Danz, David, Lise Vesterlund, and Alistair J. Wilson, “Belief Elicitation and Behavioral Incentive
of Public Economics, 2018, 157, 15–26.
and , “The hidden costs of nudging: Experimental evidence from reminders in fundraising,” Journal
2016, 66.
giving: Evidence from two natural field experiments,” Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics,
Damgaard, Mette Trier and Christina Gravert, “Now or never! The effect of deadlines on charitable
Savings?,” working paper, 2023.
Choukhmane, Taha and Christopher Palmer, “How Do Consumers Finance Increased Retirement
(3), 1141–1219.
Passive Decisions and Crowd-Out in Retirement Savings Accounts: Evidence from Denmark,” 2014, 129
, John N. Friedman, Soren Leth-Petersen, Torben Heien Nielsen, and Tore Olsen, “Active vs.
ican Economic Review, 2009, 99 (4), 1145–1177.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft, “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,” Amer-
Prices and Product Availability,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2020, 39 (3), 605–628.
, David Frisvold, Anna Hill, and David Jones, “The Impact of the Philadelphia Beverage Tax on
No. 25050.
Sugar-Sweetened Beverages: The Case of Boulder, Colorado,” NBER Working Paper, 2018. NBER WP
, Chelsea Crain, David Frisvold, and David Jones, “The Pass-Through of the Largest Tax on

34
2019, 80, 47–58.
Effect Sizes and Limits of Empirical Nudging Studies,” Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics,
Hummel, Dennis and Alexander Maedche, “How Effective is Nudging? A Quantitative Review on the
Working Paper Series, 2018. No. 036.
, “The Incidence of Coarse Certification: Evidence from the ENERGY STAR Program,” E2e Project
tion,” RAND Journal of Economics, 2018, 49 (2), 453–477.
Houde, Sebastien, “How Consumers Respond to Product Certification and the Value of Energy Informa-
ment: Evidence from Two Experiments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (4), 1373–1414.
Hastings, Justine S. and Jeffrey M. Weinstein, “Information, School Choice, and Academic Achieve-
American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (7), 2643–82.
Handel, Benjamin R, “Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When Nudging Hurts,”
Causes & Control, 2012, 23 (1), 57–67.
Adults: A Population-level Intervention with Potential to Reduce Tobacco-Related Inequities,” Cancer
Edna Arillo Santillán, “Perceived Effectiveness of Pictorial Health Warnings among Mexican Youth and
Hammond, David, James Thrasher, Jessica L Reid, Pete Driezen, Christian Boudreau, and
Medicine, 2022, 19 (2), 1–18.
Health Warnings on Purchases of Sugary Drinks for Children: A Randomized Controlled Trial,” PLOS
Prestemon, Mirian I. Avendano-Galdamez, and Lindsey Smith Taillie, “The Impact of Pictorial
Hall, Marissa G., Anna H. Grummon, Isabella C. A. Higgins, Allison J. Lazard, Carmen E.
Economics, 2017, 155, 93–107.
ity and Costly Bargaining: Theory and Evidence From Hybrid Vehicle Subsidies,” Journal of Public
Gulati, Sumeet, Carol McAusland, and James M. Sallee, “Tax Incidence with Endogenous Qual-
Medicine, 2019, 121, 158–166.
Sugar-sweetened Beverage Health Warnings Be Designed? A Randomized Experiment,” Preventive
Grummon, Anna H, Marissa G Hall, Lindsey Smith Taillie, and Noel T Brewer, “How Should
Controlled Trial,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 2019, 57 (5), 601–610.
and Noel T. Brewer, “Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Health Warnings and Purchases: A Randomized
Grummon, Anna H., Lindsey S. Taillie, Shelley D. Golden, Marissa G. Hall, Leah M. Ranney,
Studies,” PLoS Medicine, 2020, 17 (5), e1003120.
Grummon, Anna H and Marissa G Hall, “Sugary Drink Warnings: A Meta-Analysis of Experimental
2018, 10 (3), 193–225.
Tax Policy: Evidence from the European Car Market,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
Grigolon, Laura, Mathias Reynaert, and Frank Verboven, “Consumer Valuation of Fuel Costs and
litical Economy, 2020, 128 (7), 2759–2795.
Goldin, Jacob and Daniel Reck, “Revealed-Preference Analysis with Framing Effects,” Journal of Po-
2 (4), 213–35.
Commitment Contract for Smoking Cessation,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2010,
Gine, Xavier, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman, “Put Your Money Where Your Butt Is: A
Purchases: Evidence from a Natural Experiment,” NBER Working Paper, 2019. NBER WP No. 25845.
Gillingham, Kenneth, Sebastien Houde, and Arthur van Benthem, “Consumer Myopia in Vehicle
Voting and So Should You,” Journal of Politics, 2009, 71 (1), 178–191.
Gerber, Alan S and Todd Rogers, “Descriptive Social Norms and Motivation to Vote: Everybody’s

35
tenheim, Christopher F. Chabris, Gretchen B. Chapman, James J. Choi, Hengchen Dai,
Kay, Timothy W. Lee, Modupe Akinola, John Beshears, Jonathan E. Bogard, Alison But-
, Mitesh S. Patel, Linnea Gandhi, Heather N. Graci, Dena M. Gromet, Hung Ho, Joseph S.
cies,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2022, 119 (6), e2115126119.
Angela L. Duckworth, “A 680,000-person Megastudy of Nudges to Encourage Vaccination in Pharma-
Jann Spiess, Eli Tsukayama, Lyle Ungar, Christophe Van den Bulte, Kevin G. Volpp, and
Rahul Ladhania, Jens Ludwig, Nina Mazar, Sendhil Mullainathan, Christopher K. Snider,
Ashley Whillans, Kuldeep N. Yadav, Julian J. Zlatev, Ron Berman, Chalanda N. Evans,
Oakes, Maurice E. Schweitzer, Maheen Shermohammed, Joachim Talloen, Caleb Warren,
Horn, Dean S. Karlan, Ariella S. Kristal, Cait Lamberton, Michelle N. Meyer, Allison H.
Noah J. Goldstein, Amir Goren, Hal Hershfield, Alex Hirsch, Jillian Hmurovic, Samantha
Brody, Christopher F. Chabris, Edward Chang, Gretchen B. Chapman, Jennifer E. Dannals,
Hung Ho, Joseph S. Kay, Timothy W. Lee, Jake Rothschild, Jonathan E. Bogard, Ilana
Milkman, Katherine L., Linnea Gandhi, Mitesh S. Patel, Heather N. Graci, Dena M. Gromet,
the National Academy of Sciences, 2021, 119 (1), e2107346118.
nudging: A meta-analysis of choice architecture interventions across behavioral domains,” Proceedings of
Mertens, Stephanie, Mario Herberz, Ulf J. J. Hahnel, and Tobias Brosch, “The effectiveness of
and Savings Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (4), 1149–1187.
Madrian, Brigitte C and Dennis F Shea, “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation
European Economic Research Discussion Paper, 2022. No. 20-039.
age Resource Conservation? Field Experimental Evidence from a Smartphone App,” ZEW - Centre for
Loschel, Andreas, Matthias Rodemeier, and Madeline Werthschulte, “Can Self-Set Goals Encour-
2017, 1, 26–53.
Loewenstein, George and Nick Chater, “Putting Nudges in Perspective,” Behavioral Public Policy,
No. 31152.
Understanding the Welfare Effects of Nudges Versus Taxes,” NBER Working Paper, 2023. NBER WP
List, John A., Matthias Rodemeier, Sutanuka Roy, and Gregory K. Sun, “Judging Nudging:
of Household Energy Use,” NBER Working Paper, 2019. NBER WP No. 26531.
Knittel, Christopher R and Samuel Stolper, “Using Machine Learning to Target Treatment: The Case
tions,” 2019. Working paper, available from authors upon request.
Knittel, Christopher R. and James M. Sallee, “Automobile Depreciation: Estimation and Implica-
of the General Nutrition Knowledge Questionnaire,” 2016, 70 (10), 1174–1180.
Kliemann, N., J. Wardle, F. Johnson, and H. Croker, “Reliability and Validity of a Revised Version
163.
labels in a supermarket experiment,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 2013, 31 (2), 153–
Kiesel, Kristin and Sofia B. Villas-Boas, “Can information costs affect consumer choice? Nutritional
Choices,” NBER Working Paper, 2023. NBER WP No. 31534.
and Sen Zeng, “Fear or Knowledge: The Impact of Graphic Cigarette Warnings on Tobacco Product
Kenkel, Donald S., Alan D. Mathios, Grace N. Phillips, Revathy Suryanarayana, Hua Wang,
of Economics, 2010, 125 (2), 515–548.
Jensen, Robert, “The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling,” Quarterly Journal
(1), 240–67.
Experimental Evidence from Energy Demand,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2018, 10
Ito, Koichiro, Takanori Ida, and Makoto Tanaka, “Moral Suasion and Economic Incentives: Field

36
California, US: A Before-and-after Study,” PLOS Medicine, 2017, 14 (4), 1–19.
Spending, and Beverage Consumption One Year After a Tax on Sugar-sweetened Beverages in Berkeley,
Donna R. Miles, Jennifer M. Poti, and Barry M. Popkin, “Changes in Prices, Sales, Consumer
Silver, Lynn D., Shu Wen Ng, Suzanne Ryan-Ibarra, Lindsey Smith Taillie, Marta Induni,
Avoidance, and Nutritional Effects,” Journal of Marketing Research, 2021, 58 (1), 22–49.
Seiler, Stephan, Anna Tuchman, and Song Yao, “The Impact of Soda Taxes: Pass-Through, Tax
tion, 2014, 12 (6), 1423–1452.
Schwartzstein, Joshua, “Selective Attention and Learning,” Journal of the European Economic Associa-
2007, 18 (5), 429–434.
cius, “The Constructive, Destructive, and Reconstructive Power of Social Norms,” Psychological Science,
Schultz, P Wesley, Jessica M Nolan, Robert B Cialdini, Noah J Goldstein, and Vladas Griskevi-
From Used Car Prices and Gasoline Price Fluctuations,” Journal of Public Economics, 2016, 135, 61–73.
, Sarah E. West, and Wei Fan, “Do Consumers Recognize the Value of Fuel Economy? Evidence
Journal: Economic Policy, 2011, 3 (2), 189–219.
Sallee, James M., “The Surprising Incidence of Tax Credits for the Toyota Prius,” American Economic
Efficiency Investments,” Available at SSRN 4213071, 2023.
and , “Information Nudges, Subsidies, and Crowding Out of Attention: Field Evidence from Energy
Attention: Field Evidence from Energy Efficiency Investments,” Available at SSRN 4213071, 2022.
Rodemeier, Matthias and Andreas Loschel, “Information Nudges, Subsidies, and Crowding Out of
921–929.
Tax on Beverage Prices and Sales Over 2 Years,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 2022, 62 (6),
Hannah G. Lawman, and Christina A. Roberto, “Sustained Impact of the Philadelphia Beverage
Petimar, Joshua, Laura A. Gibson, Jiali Yan, Sara N. Bleich, Nandita Mitra, Marsha L. Trego,
Public Policy: Lessons from Around the World 2017.
OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development), Behavioural Insights and
2017BESTMILE Documentation.pdf.
nhts.ornl.gov/assets/ for 2017 NHTS Vehicles,” Technical Report undated. Available at
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, “Developing a Best Estimate of Annual Vehicle Mileage
34 (7), 913–923.
vicius, “Normative Social Influence is Underdetected,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 2008,
Nolan, Jessica M, P Wesley Schultz, Robert B Cialdini, Noah J Goldstein, and Vladas Griske-
proach to Behavioral Public Finance,” Annual Review of Economics, 2012, 4 (1), 511–540.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, Joshua Schwartzstein, and William J Congdon, “A Reduced-Form Ap-
about Sugary Drink Options,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 2018, 55 (2), e19–e27.
Moran, Alyssa J and Christina A Roberto, “Health Warning Labels Correct Parents’ Misperceptions
2021, 118 (20), e2101165118.
Vaccinated at an Upcoming Doctor’s Appointment,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
Volpp, and Angela L. Duckworth, “A Megastudy of Text-based Nudges Encouraging Patients to Get
landa N. Evans, Christopher K. Snider, Eli Tsukayama, Christophe Van den Bulte, Kevin G.
mohammed, Dilip Soman, Jehan Sparks, Caleb Warren, Megan Weber, Ron Berman, Cha-
Maria Modanu, Jimin Nam, Todd Rogers, Renante Rondina, Silvia Saccardo, Maheen Sher-
lan, Melanie Kim, David Laibson, Cait Lamberton, Brigitte C. Madrian, Michelle N. Meyer,
Craig R. Fox, Amir Goren, Matthew D. Hilchey, Jillian Hmurovic, Leslie K. John, Dean Kar-

37
employer-sponsored-insurance-0.
https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/actuarial-value- Insurance,” Technical Report 2011. Available at
Yong, Peirre L., John Bertko, and Richard Kronick, “Actuarial Value and Employer-Sponsored
Imperfect Competition,” Journal of Political Economy, 2013, 121 (3), 528–583.
Weyl, E. Glen and Michal Fabinger, “Pass-Through as an Economic Tool: Principles of Incidence under
betes,” Health Affairs, 2012, 31 (1), 199–207.
“A Penny-Per-Ounce Tax on Sugar-Sweetened Beverages Would Cut Health and Cost Burdens of Dia-
Wang, Y Claire, Pamela Coxson, Yu-Ming Shen, Lee Goldman, and Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo,
TechnicalSupportDocument SocialCostofCarbonMethaneNitrousOxide.pdf.
www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/ Technical Report 2021. Available at
“Technical Support Document: Social Cost of Carbon, Methane, and Nitrous Oxide,”
U.S. Government Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases,
42435.
www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id= Lower than in 2018,” Technical Report 2020. Available at
U.S. Energy Information Administration, “U.S. Average Retail Gasoline Prices in 2019 Were Slightly
and Decision Making, 2019, 14 (1), 11.
Thunström, Linda, “Welfare Effects of Nudges: The Emotional Tax of Calorie Menu Labeling,” Judgment
(1), 69–80.
Experiments in Mexico to Assess Pictorial Warning Label Content,” Cancer Causes & Control, 2012, 23
“Can Pictorial Warning Labels on Cigarette Packages Address Smoking-related Health Disparities? Field
Hammond, Jarvis Carter, Ernesto Sebrié, Raul Sansores, and Justino Regalado-Piñeda,
Thrasher, James F, Edna Arillo-Santillán, Victor Villalobos, Rosaura Pérez-Hernández, David
and , Nudge: The Final Edition, Penguin, 2021.
Happiness, Penguin, 2008.
Thaler, Richard H and Cass R Sunstein, Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and
of Chicago Law Review, 2003, 70 (4), 1159–1202.
Thaler, Richard H. and Cass R. Sunstein, “Libertarian Paternalism Is Not an Oxymoron,” University
from a Tax Salience Experiment,” Review of Economic Studies, 2018, 85 (4), 2462–2496.
Taubinsky, Dmitry and Alex Rees-Jones, “Attention Variation and Welfare: Theory and Evidence
purchases from 2015 to 2017: A before-and-after study,” PLoS Med, 2020, 17 (2).
valan, “An evaluation of Chile’s Law of Food Labeling and Advertising on sugar-sweetened beverage
Taillie, Lindsey Smith, Marcela Reyes, M. Arantxa Colchero, Barry Popkin, and Camila Cor-
389–416.
Spiegler, Ran, “On the Equilibrium Effects of Nudging,” The Journal of Legal Studies, 2015, 44 (2),

38
externality as well as indicators for product pairs j and MPL order.
the full random coefficient (mixed effects) models. All regressions also include controls for bias and
coefficient (OLS) versions of equations (12) and (16), respectively, while columns 3 and 4 present
cars experiment and drinks experiment, pooling across all labels. Columns 1 and 2 present fixed
Notes: Panels (a) and (b), respectively, present estimated ATEs, variances, and covariances for the
Number of observations 7,857 7,857 7,857 7,857
Number of participants 2,619 2,619 2,619 2,619
(standard error) (0.187)
Var(treatment effect) 0.743
(standard error) (0.055) (0.055)
Cov(bias, treatment effect) 0.130 0.129
(0.04) (0.04)
Bias Treated 0.08** 0.08** ×
(0.04) (0.09) (0.04) (0.09)
Treated -0.43*** -0.65*** -0.43*** -0.65***
OLS OLS Mixed effects Mixed effects
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(b) Drinks Experiment
Number of observations 2,534 2,534 2,534 2,534
Number of participants 1,267 1,267 1,267 1,267
(standard error) (11,925)
Var(treatment effect) 30,428
(standard error) (513) (514)
Cov(externality, treatment effect) -35 -37
(standard error) (20,902) (21,348)
Cov(bias, treatment effect) -1,106 -7,744
(1.06) (1.06)
Externality × Treated -0.06 -0.01
(0.04) (0.04)
Bias × Treated -0.00 -0.01
(23.30) (57.44) (23.42) (57.42)
Treated -59.10** -55.81 -58.70** -56.69
OLS OLS Mixed effects Mixed effects
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(a) Cars Experiment
Table 1: Average Treatment Effects, Variance, and Covariance

39
Standard errors are in parentheses.
the parameters reported above. “Unit” is “vehicle-year” for cars and “12-pack” for sugary drinks.
each experiment. ∆W (t = 0) and ∆W (t = t ) are computed using equations (19) and (20), given
∗
Notes: This table presents parameter estimates and total surplus effects, pooling across labels in
∆W (t = t ) Total surplus effect with optimal tax ($/unit) −4.43 −0.07
∗
E
if pure noise: [τ ] = Cov [δ, τ ] = 0 −9.07 −0.05
E
if zero average effect: [τ ] = 0 −4.43 −0.07
if homogeneous effect: Cov [δ, τ ] = V ar [τ ] = 0 4.36 0.18
∆W (t = 0) Total surplus effect with no tax ($/unit) −0.07 0.11
µ Markup ($/unit) 0 0
ρ Pass-through (unitless) 0.80 0.80
(514)
Cov [ϕ, τ ] Externality and treatment effect covariance (($/unit) ) -37 0
2
(21, 348) (0.05)
Cov [γ, τ ] Bias and treatment effect covariance (($/unit) ) −7, 744 0.13 2
(11,925) (0.19)
V ar [τ ] Treatment effect variance (($/unit) 30,428 0.74
2
(23) (0.04)
E
[τ ] Average treatment effect ($/unit) −59 −0.43
(0.62) (0.00)
E
[ϕ] Average externality ($/unit) 50 1.22
(17.6) (0.02)
E
[γ] Average bias ($/unit) 135 2.56
p
D Demand slope (share of purchases/($/unit) −0.00060 −0.14
′
Parameter Description experiment experiment
Cars Drinks
(1) (2)
Table 2: Parameters and Welfare Analysis: Pooled Labels

40
τ for illustration. See text for details. {γ, }
Notes: This figure illustrates the effect of a marginal nudge on total surplus, assuming homogeneous
Quantity
$
C
D
𝜏𝜏 ⋅ 𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑
Nudge effect:
𝑐𝑐𝑐 optimum
𝛾𝛾 + 𝜎𝜎𝜎𝜎 − 𝜇𝜇 − 𝑡𝑡
Social
𝜇𝜇 + 𝑡𝑡 Net distortion:
𝑝𝑝
A
E
B
G
F
𝛾𝛾 Bias:
equilibrium
Initial
utility
Marginal 𝐷𝐷(𝑝𝑝)
demand
demand:
Nudged
Market
Figure 1: Effect of Marginal Nudge on Total Surplus

41
experiment.
Notes: Panels (a) and (b), respectively, present the labels used in the cars experiment and drinks
(b) Drinks Experiment
label label label
Nutrition facts Stop sign warning Graphic warning
(a) Cars Experiment
label label cost label
SmartWay label
Average cost Full MPG Personalized
$932
Figure 2: Labels

42
externality.
pants in the cars experiment and drinks experiment. The vertical lines are the average bias and
Notes: Panels (a) and (b), respectively, present the distributions of bias estimates across partici-
$/12-pack
0 1 2 3 4 5
0
10
Percent
20
30
Average externality Average bias
(b) Drinks Experiment
$/vehicle-year
-1,500 -1,000 -500 0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000
≤-2,000 ≥2,500
0
10
Percent
20
30
Average externality Average bias
(a) Cars Experiment
Figure 3: Distributions of Bias Estimates

43
changes in the cars experiment and drinks experiment.
Notes: Panels (a) and (b), respectively, present histograms of baseline-endline willingness-to-pay
Control Treatment (any)
Change in relative WTP for sugary drink ($/12-pack)
-3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
≤-3.5
0
20
40
Percent
60
80
(b) Drinks Experiment
Control Treatment (any)
Change in relative valuation of lower-MPG car ($/vehicle-year)
-900 -600 -300 0 300 600 900 1,200
≤-1,500-1,200 ≥1,500
0
10
20
Percent
30
40
(a) Cars Experiment
Figure 4: Changes in Willingness-to-Pay

44
are no above- and below-median externality subgroups.
or externality estimates. In the drinks experiment, we assume homogeneous externalities, so there
coefficients are heterogeneous effects in subgroups of observations with above- or below-median bias
label, the coefficients on the left are average treatment effects in the full samples. The remaining
and drinks experiment, also controlling for product pair and choice order indicators. For each
Notes: Panels (a) and (b), respectively, present estimates of equation (12) for the cars experiment
bias bias
All
Below-median Above-median
Treatment group
facts
Nutrition Stop sign Graphic Pooled
-.8
-.6 for
Treatment
sugary
-.4
effect
drinks
on
-.2
relative
0
($/12-pack)
WTP
.2
(b) Drinks Experiment
bias bias externality externality
All
Below-median Above-median Below-median Above-median
Treatment group
cost
Full MPG Average cost Personalized SmartWay Pooled
-200
for
-150
Treatment
-100
lower-MPG
effect
car
-50
on
0
relative
WTP 50
($/vehicle-year)
(a) Cars Experiment
Figure 5: Average Treatment Effects and Heterogeneity

45
WTP to receive labels.
to receive or avoid receiving labels on the packages. This figure presents the average hypothetical
receive 12-packs of sugary drinks. The survey then elicited their hypothetical willingness-to-pay
Notes: For this survey question, participants were told to assume that they had been selected to
Treatment group
Nutrition facts Stop sign Graphic Pooled
-3
-2
Willingness
to
pay -1
to
0
receive
labels
1
($/12-pack)
2
Figure 6: Willingness-to-Pay to Receive Labels

46
p
E
tax t = [δ + στ ] µ is t D . − − ∗ 12 ∗2 ′
and (20), given the other parameters reported in Table 2. The total surplus gain from the optimal
sumptions for V ar(τ ) and Cov(τ, δ). The total surplus effects are computed using equations (19)
Notes: This figure presents the effects of labels and taxes on total surplus under alternative as-
Tax (w/ label) Label (w/ tax) Tax (w/ label) Label (w/ tax)
Tax (w/o label) Label (w/o tax) Tax (w/o label) Label (w/o tax)
Variance of label effect (($/12-pack)^2) Covariance between bias + externality and label effect (($/12-pack)^2)
0 2 4 6 8 10 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5
-1 -1
-.75 -.75
-.5 -.5
Total
-.25 -.25
surplus
0 0
gain
.25 .25
.5 .5 ($/12-pack)
.75 .75
1 1
Estimated value Estimated value
(b) Drinks Experiment
Tax (w/ label) Label (w/ tax) Tax (w/ label) Label (w/ tax)
Tax (w/o label) Label (w/o tax) Tax (w/o label) Label (w/o tax)
Variance of label effect (($/vehicle-year)^2) Covariance between bias + externality and label effect (($/vehicle-year)^2)
0 10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000 60,000 -30,000 -15,000 0 15,000 30,000
-16 -30
-25
-12
-20
Total -8
-15
surplus -4
-10
gain
-5 0
0
4
5
($/vehicle-year)
8
10
12 15
Estimated value Estimated value
(a) Cars Experiment
Figure 7: Total Surplus Effects Under Alternative Targeting Assumptions

47
p
E
t = [δ + στ ] µ is t D . − −
∗ 12 ∗2 ′
given the other parameters reported in Table 2. The total surplus gain from the optimal tax
sumptions for ρ and µ. The total surplus effects are computed using equations (19) and (20),
Notes: This figure presents the effects of labels and taxes on total surplus under alternative as-
Tax (w/ label) Label (w/ tax) Tax (w/ label) Label (w/ tax)
Tax (w/o label) Label (w/o tax) Tax (w/o label) Label (w/o tax)
Pass-through rate difference Markup difference / price
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 -0.25 -0.20 -0.15 -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25
-.25 -.25
0
0
.25
Total
.25
.5
surplus
.5
gain
.75
.75
1
($/12-pack)
1
1.25
1.5
1.25
Assumed value Assumed value
(b) Drinks Experiment
Tax (w/ label) Label (w/ tax) Tax (w/ label) Label (w/ tax)
Tax (w/o label) Label (w/o tax) Tax (w/o label) Label (w/o tax)
Pass-through rate difference Markup difference / price
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 -0.25 -0.20 -0.15 -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25
-8
-100
-6
0
-4
Total
-2 100
0
surplus
200
2
gain
300 4
6
400
($/vehicle-year) 8
500
10
12
600
Assumed value Assumed value
(a) Cars Experiment
tions
Figure 8: Total Surplus Effects Under Alternative Pass-Through and Markup Assump-

48
Hunt Allcott, Daniel Cohen, William Morrison, and Dmitry Taubinsky
When Do “Nudges” Increase Welfare?
Online Appendix
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

49
E Welfare Analysis Appendix 78
D.2 Alternate Covariance Estimation Strategy for the Drinks Experiment . . . . . . . . 77
D.1 Estimates of Table 1 by Label . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
D Empirical Results Appendix 67
C Data Appendix 63
B.2 Drinks Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
B.1 Cars Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
B Experimental Design Appendix 58
A.4 Generalization to Many Goods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
A.3 Proofs of Lemma 1) and Propositions 1 and 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
A.2 Impacts on Consumer and Producer Surplus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
(2022) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
A.1 Relation to Deliberative Competence Metrics of Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi
A Theory Appendix 50
Table of Contents
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

50
constant in σ and p. When µ > 0 and the elasticity is not approximately constant, the assumption
The assumption of the lemma holds when µ = 0 or when the demand elasticity is approximately
dσ
m
= (1 − ρ)E [τ ]. (23)
dp
nudge intensity σ as follows:
dσ dp
m
Lemma 1. Suppose that µ D = [τ ] D . The equilibrium market price p varies with the −µE
dε dε
A.2 Impacts on Consumer and Producer Surplus
increases in social or consumer surplus under an even larger set of assumptions.
in Proposition 2 below. Finally, it is clear that minimizing the L1 metric need not correspond to
minimizing the L2 metric need not correspond to increases in consumer surplus, which is formalized
nudge improves deliberative competence but does not increase total surplus. For similar reasons,
ments in total surplus. These various failures are illustrated in Examples 4, 5, and 6, where the
Proposition 1 shows that improvements in deliberative competence don’t correspond to improve-
is ρ = 1, that the tax is t = 0, and that there is no aversiveness. If one of those assumptions fails,
1 under the assumptions that markets are perfectly competitive, that the pass-through parameter
Under this definition, minimizing the L2 metric corresponds to the special case of Proposition
m E
competence under the L2 metric if [(γ + στ ) ] is decreasing in σ ∈ [0, 1].
2
m E
competence under the L1 metric if [γ +στ ] is decreasing in σ [0, 1], and it improves deliberative ∈
Definition 2. Choosing a nudge with intensity σ = 1 rather than σ = 0 improves deliberative
comparable, and we now focus on this more comparable definition:
Of course, one can adapt their definition to marginal consumers as well to make it more
consumers differentially, there will be a fundamental disconnect between our metrics and theirs.
with observed producer prices. Thus, if the nudge affects the population versus the marginal
population, rather than to marginal consumers. By contrast, our welfare formulas concern markets
Ambuehl et al. study environments with an ex-ante unknown price, their metrics apply to the full
There are several differences between our welfare metrics and these definitions. First, because
E[(γ E[γ
and it improves deliberative competence under the L2 metric if + τ ) ] < ].
2 2
E[|γ E[|γ|]
Definition 1. A nudge improves deliberative competence under the L1 metric if + τ < |]
externalities. Under these assumptions, they propose the following metrics:
Ambuehl et al. also consider situations where all distortions come from consumer bias, and not
without directly affecting utility, which in our terminology is equivalent to nudges with ι 0. ≡
use to evaluate financial literacy interventions. Ambuehl et al. evaluate frames that affect choice
Ambuehl, Bernheim and Lusardi (2022) propose measures of deliberative competence, which they
Lusardi (2022)
A.1 Relation to Deliberative Competence Metrics of Ambuehl, Bernheim and
A Theory Appendix
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

51
A.3.3, respectively.
Proofs of Lemma 1 and Proposition 2 are intermediate results derived in Appendices A.3.1 and
This appendix presents a series of derivations that together contain the proof of Proposition 1.
A.3 Proofs of Lemma 1) and Propositions 1 and 2
surplus if they increase demand for the product and therefore raise prices.
Proposition 2 thus shows that such nudges can have an even more negative effects on consumer
Section 1.2 has shown that even nudges that only “debias” consumers can decrease total surplus.
dσ
m
− (1 − ρ)E [τ ]q ; i.e., the impact on total surplus minus the impact on prices. The example in
dW ∗
dσ
For example, when µ = I 0, the impact on consumer surplus can be written as C = ≡
dW
dσ
p
m m
= (1 ρ)E [τ ]q µρE [τ ]D (26) − −
∗ ′ P
dW
∂σ ∂p
m m
− (1 − ρ)E [τ ]q + + (1 − ρ)E [τ ] (25)
∗
∂I ∂I
dσ 2 ∂σ 2 ∂σ
p m m
E
= (1 ρ) V ar [γ + στ ] + ρ (γ + στ ) D (24) −   2 ′ C
dW 1 ∂ 1 ∂  
by
C P
the impacts of the nudge on consumer surplus W and producer surplus W are respectively given
Proposition 2. Let q denote the equilibrium quantity purchased in the market. With a fixed tax t,
∗
in markets with taxes fixed at t = 0.
small effects on behavior. We formalize this below by quantifying the effects on consumer surplus
be negligible relative to the conjectured benefits of “light-touch” interventions that have relatively
order” relative to the other effects of the nudges, so that the effects on prices can be argued to
It may also help to explicitly note that this effect on prices is not in some informal sense “second
beyond improvements to decision quality.
demand also lead to lower equilibrium prices, which generates additional benefits to consumers
than the efficiency gain itself. Conversely, nudges that increase social efficiency by depressing
by transferring surplus from consumers toproducers, with the size of the transfer potentially larger
of their bias. Thus, even if a nudge stimulates demand in a socially efficient way, it might do so
product will lead to higher producer prices, and thus potentially harm all consumers, irrespective
is the impact of nudges on producer prices. When ρ < 1, any nudge that increases demand for a
The lemma shows that the lower is the pass-through of taxes to final consumer prices, the larger
treatment effect τ have the same elasticity.
is when the demand curves D that correspond to each set of consumers that experience a given
τ
also mechanically holds when τ is homogeneous. Another example of when the assumption holds
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

52
Differentiating yields
v≥p(t)−γ−στ
W = vdF c(q ) + I. (34) −
∗
Z
The tax must maximize
A.3.2 Optimal Tax Formula
ment effects. This establishes Lemma 1.
dσ dp
m
For example, µ D = [τ ] D holds with constant-elasticity demand or homogeneous treat- −µE
dε dε
dσ dt
m m E
= [τ ] = (1 ρ)E [τ ]. (33) − −
dp dp
c
dt dt dσ dp
m
The pass-through is = ρ = 1 + . Thus, if µ D = [τ ] D , then −µE
dp dp dε dε
p c
dt 1 θ c (q)D − − ′′ ′
= . (32)
dp p
dp
c (q)D − µ D
′′ ′ dε
a tax is just a special case of a nudge with τ ≡ 1):
c
Analogously, a tax t on consumers changes producer prices as follows (noting that in this case
p
dσ 1 − θ − c (q)D ′′ ′
= . (31)
dσ p m E dp D −c (q)D [τ ] − µ
′′ ′ dε
or
dσ dσ
p p m
E
1 θ c (q)D = (q)D [τ ] (p c (q) t) , (30) − − −c − − −  ′′ ′ ′′ ′ ′ D
dp dε
and thus
dσ dσ dσ dσ
p p m D E
θ = c (q)(−D [τ ] + D ) ε + (p c (q) t) , (29) − − −
′′ ′ ′ ′ D
dp dp dp dε  
Plugging equation (28) into (27) thus implies that
dσ ∂σ ∂p dσ ∂p ∂p dσ
m E
= + = [τ ] + . (28) −
dq ∂D ∂D dp ∂D ∂D dp
dσ
Now the equilibrium demand response is
dq
dσ dσ dσ dσ
D
θ = c (q) ε + (p c (q) t) . (27) − − −
′′ ′ D
dp dp dq dε  
D
equation θp = (p c (q) t)ε with respect to σ yields − −
′
p
D
Consider the Lerner index θ := ε , which we assumed to be constant. Differentiating the
p−c (q)−t
′
A.3.1 Pass-Through Formula (Proof of Lemma 1)
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

53
dσ
p m
c(q ) = c (q )ρE [τ ]D . (44)
∗ ′ ∗ ′
d
Thus
dσ ∂p ∂p
p m m m E
= [τ ] + (1 ρ)E [τ ] = [τ ]D . (43) − − −ρE
′
dq ∂D ∂D
∗
Equation (28) and Lemma 1 imply that the impact of σ on equilibrium quantity q is
∗
v≥p−γ−στ
p − c(q ), and total surplus is given by W = vdF − c(q ) + I. R ∗ ∗
v≥p−γ−στ
C P
Consumer surplus is given by W = vdF pq + I, producer surplus is given by W = − R ∗
A.3.3 Impacts on Consumer, Producer, and Total Surplus in the Absence of Taxes
t=0
dt
W (t )t /2 = t /2. (42) −
′′ ∗ ∗2 ∗2
dD
of the optimal tax is
dt dt ∂p 2
Under the assumption that terms of order t and Dt are negligible, the welfare impact
d D 2 d ∂ 2
2
purchasing the good versus not.
m
where σE [∆ι] is the average difference in psychic costs that consumers on the margin obtain from
m m
E
t = [γ + στ ] µ σE [∆ι] , (41) − −
∗
or alternatively,
dt
dD
m E
t = [γ + στ ] − µ − ρ , (40)
∗ dp
dI
Setting W (t ) = 0 thus implies that
′ ∗
dt ∂p
m
E
W (t) = (µ + t [γ + στ ]) + ρ . (39) −
′
dD ∂I
Substituting p(t) c = µ + t implies that − ′
where q = P r(v p(t) γ στ ). ≥ − −
∗
dt ∂p
m E
= (p(t) [γ + στ ]) c (q )) + ρ , (38) − −
′ ∗
dD ∂I
dt ∂p
p m
E
= (q ) + D p (t) (p(t) [γ + στ ]) + ρ (37) −c −
′ ∗ ′
dq ∂I
∗
v=p(t)−γ−στ
∂p dt
f (p(t) γ σt)(p(t) γ στ )(p (t)) + (36) − − − − −
′
∂I dp Z
dt dt
= (q ) (35) −c
′ ∗
dW dq
∗
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

54
C P
Putting this together, the impact on total surplus W = W + W is
p
m m
= (1 ρ)E [τ ]q µρE [τ ]D . (60) − −
∗ ′
p m m
= (1 − ρ)E [τ ]q − (p − c (q ))ρE [τ ]D (59)
∗ ′ ∗ ′
p p m m m
= (1 ρ)E [τ ]q pρE [τ ]D c (q )ρE [τ ]D (58) − − −
∗ ′ ′ ∗ ′
dσ dσ dσ dσ
= q + p c(q ) (57) −
∗ ∗ P
dW dp dq d
∗
The impact on producer surplus is given by
2 ∂σ 2 ∂σ dσ
p p
m m m E
= (1 ρ) V ar [γ + στ ] D + ρ (γ + στ ) D (1 ρ)E [τ ]q + . (56) − − −   ′ 2 ′ ∗
1 ∂ 1 ∂ dI
dσ dσ dσ
p m
− q + p − pρE [τ ]D + (55)
∗ ′
dp dq dI   ∗
dσ 2 ∂σ 2 ∂σ
p p m m E
= (1 − ρ) V ar [γ + στ ] D + ρ (γ + στ ) D (54)   2 C ′ ′
dW 1 ∂ 1 ∂
The impact on consumer surplus is thus given by
v≥p−γ−στ
dσ 2 ∂σ 2 ∂σ
p p p m m m E
vdF = [τ ]D + (1−ρ) V ar [γ + στ ] D + ρ (γ + στ ) D . (53) −pρE   ′ ′ 2 ′
d Z 1 ∂ 1 ∂
dσ v≥p−γ−στ
Substituting into our derivations of vdF above we have that
d R
2 ∂σ
m m m m E E
V ar [(γ + στ ) ] = [(γ + στ )τ ] [(γ + στ )]E [τ ]. (52) −
2
1 ∂
and
2 ∂σ
m m E E
[(γ + στ ) ] = [τ (γ + στ )] (51)
2
1 ∂
Thus,
2 dσ
(γ + στ ) = γτ + στ = τ (γ + στ ). (50)
2 2
1 d
Now observe that for each τ ,
p m m m E
+ (1 − ρ) (E [(γ + στ )τ ] − [γ + στ ]E [τ ]) D . (49)
′
p p m m
= [τ ]D + ρE [(γ + στ )τ ]D (48) −pρE
′ ′
p p m m m E
= −pρE [τ ]D − [(γ + στ )(−τ + (1 − ρ)E [τ ])]D (47)
′ ′
p m m E
= [(p γ στ )(−τ + (1 ρ)E [τ ])]D (46) − − −
′
v≥p−γ−στ v=p−γ−στ
dσ dσ
vdF = − (p − γ − στ ) −τ + dF (45)
d dp Z Z  
Using the multidimensional Leibniz rule, we have that
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

55
dσ ∂σ ∂p dσ
p m m
= V ar [γ + στ ] D + ρE [τ ] + (66)
′
dW ∂ ∂I dI
It thus follows that at the optimal tax,
2 ∂σ
m m m
= ρ V ar [γ + στ ] + ρE [τ ]E [σ∆ι]. (65)
1 ∂
m m m
E[γ
ρE [(γ + στ t µ)τ ] = ρE[(γ + στ + στ ])τ ] + ρE [τ ]E [∆ι] (64) − − −
∗
Now at the optimal tax,
m m E E
[γ + στ ] − µ − [∆ι] as fixed.
dσ ∂σ
By the envelope theorem, = , where the partial derivative treats the optimal tax t =
dW ∂W ∗
A.3.6 Impact on Total Surplus with Optimal Tax
m m
where µ = p c (q) t, and where we use that V ar [γ + στ ] = V ar [γ + στ t] . − − −
′
dσ 2 ∂σ 2 ∂σ
p p m m
E
= (1 ρ) V ar [γ + στ ] D + ρ (γ + στ t µ) D (63) − − −  2  ′ ′
dW 1 ∂ 1 ∂
From above, we thus trivially have that when the tax is fixed at some value t,
c c
imposing a fixed tax t on consumers is equivalent to assuming that bias is given by γ = γ − t .
′
c
A fixed tax t on producers has the same social welfare effect as a tax t = t on consumers. Now
A.3.5 Impacts on Total Surplus with a Fixed Tax
does not independently affect consumers, given a producer price p.
function, in which case all calculations are identical. On the consumer side, the tax t on producers
reason is that on the producer side, the tax t can be considered to simply be part of the cost
dσ dσ
Our formulas for P and C are identical if there is instead a fixed tax t on producers. The
dW dW
A.3.4 Impacts on Consumer and Producer Surplus with a Fixed Tax
∂σ ∂p
m
= + (1 − ρ)E [τ ] . (62)
∂I ∂I
dσ ∂σ dσ dp
= +
dI ∂I dp ∂I
Finally, to obtain the statement of Proposition 1, note that
dσ 2 ∂σ 2 ∂σ dσ
p p m m E
= (1 − ρ) V ar [γ + στ ] D + ρ (γ + στ − µ) D + . (61)   2 ′ ′
dW 1 ∂ 1 ∂ dI
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

56
1
∂σ ∂p
1 E
= [τ ]. (69) −
j j
∂D ∂D
Analogous to Lemma 1,
A.4.1 Impact of Nudge on prices
for any function X.
1 1 2 2
{(v,γ,τ )|v −p −στ =v −p }
∂σ dσ
′
1j σ =σ E ′
[X(v, γ, σ, τ )] := X(v, γ, σ , τ )dF | . (68)
′
∂ d Z
operators. With a slight abuse of notation, we define
product 1 versus any other product. We utilize analogous notation for the covariance and variance
j 1 1j E E
[X] = [X] as the expectation over the set of consumers who are on the margin for buying P
X over the set of consumers who are on the margin of buying either product i or j. We define
ij E
For any function X(v, γ, σ, τ ) we define [X(v, γ, σ, τ )] to be the conditional expectation of
1 1j
the pass through of t to ∆p .
1j 1 j 1j 11 1j
by ∆p = p − p the relative price of product 1 to product j, and we let ∆ρ := ρ − ρ denote
jk
We define ρ to be the impact of a tax on producers of j on the price of product k. We denote
j
j j
it is constant. We let µ = p − c (q) − t denote the markup.
′
p D
j
unit. Let θ := ε denote the market conduct parameter for product j, and assume that j j j
p−c (q)−t
′
j j
Each firm produces only one type of product, at cost c (q) to for q units, and pays tax t per
is an immediate corollary that is obtained by taking the sum of the effects on each good.
D
j
respect to the price p of product j by ε . The general case where the nudge affects multiple goods
ij
j j
dp D
demand for product j by ε = , and denote the elasticity of demand of product i with − j · j
jD ∂D p
j
curve for product j is D (p, σ), where p is the vector of prices. Denote the own-price elasticity of
distribution of treatment effects on this product, where σ is the strength of the nudge. The demand
product, which we label product 1 without loss of generality, and we let στ continue denoting the
1 J
γ = (γ , . . . , γ ). For simplicity, we assume that the nudge only directly affects valuations of a single
1 j
A given consumer’s set of valuations and biases is given by the vectors v = (v , . . . , v ) and
fixed price.
corresponds to the special case with two products, where product j = 2 is an outside good with a
and that each consumer must buy at least one of the products. The model in the body of the paper
More generally, suppose that there are J different types of products, indexed by j = . . . , J}, {1,
A.4 Generalization to Many Goods
dσ ∂σ ∂σ ∂p
p m m E
= V ar [γ + στ ] D + + [τ ] . (67)
′
dW ∂ ∂I ∂I
∂p p m
E
where we use that = [σ∆ι]D . Substituting the expression in equation (62) gives
∂I ′
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

57
welfare impacts corresponding to each pair of good 1 and some other good j.
1 j
the difference µ µ . The general formula for many goods is obtained by taking the sum of the −
1 2
good 1 relative to good 2, γ γ . And the interaction with market power is now captured by −
1 2
good 1 to the relative price, p − p , of good 1. The key bias statistic is how much people overvalue
when the price of the outside good is exogenous, the key parameter is the pass-through of the tax on
to an expression almost identical to the one in the body of the paper. The main difference is that
For intuition, note that when there are only two goods, the general expression above reduces
1
∂σ ∂p
11 1
+ + (1 − ρ )E [τ ] . (73)
∂I ∂I
(72)
j
1
dσ 2 ∂σ 2 ∂σ ∂p
1j 1j 1j 1j 1j 1j 1 j 1j j E
= − (1 − ∆ρ ) V ar [∆γ + στ ] + (∆ρ ) (∆γ + στ − t + t − ∆µ ) D   2 X
dW 1 ∂ 1 ∂ ∂  
j
nudge in a market with taxes t on products j is
1j 1 j 1j 1 j
Define ∆γ = γ γ and ∆µ = µ µ . Then the marginal change in total surplus from a − −
k
dp D dσ D
Proposition 3. Assume that ε and ε are negligible in the case where µ > 0 for all i, j, k.
d d ij 1j
Calculations analogous to the proof of Proposition 1 imply the following:
A.4.2 Impact of Nudge on Welfare
c
dσ dt
1j 1j 1j E
= − [τ ] = (1 − ρ )E [τ ]. (71)
j j
dp dp
and more generally
c
dσ dt
1 11 1 E
= − [τ ] = (1 − ρ )E [τ ], (70)
1 1
dp dp
c
dt
1 c jj E
is equivalent to a marginal change of [τ ] in t . Thus, since ρ = 1 + , we have that j
dp
c
Similarly, consider a consumer tax t on product 1. The impact of a marginal change in σ on prices
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

58
Figure A1: Cars Experiment: Valuation if Gas is Free
B.1 Cars Experiment
B Experimental Design Appendix
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

59
Figure A2: Cars Experiment: Baseline Multiple Price List
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

60
Figure A3: Cars Experiment: Endline Multiple Price List with Full MPG Label
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

61
Figure A4: Drinks Experiment: Recruitment Ad
B.2 Drinks Experiment
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

62
Figure A6: Drinks Experiment: Endline Multiple Price List with Stop Sign Label
Figure A5: Drinks Experiment: Baseline Multiple Price List
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

63
Lockwood and Taubinsky (2019a). The experiment sample includes 2,619 participants.
0, “Mostly” = 1/3, “Somewhat” = 2/3, and “Not at all” = 1. National averages are as reported in Allcott,
pop or other sugar-sweetened beverages more often than I should.” Responses were coded as “Definitely” =
Questionnaire (Kliemann et al. 2016). Self-control is level of agreement with the statement, “I drink soda
Surveys. Nutrition knowledge is the share correct out of 28 questions from the General Nutrition Knowledge
Notes: US population averages for demographic variables are from the 2016–2020 American Community
Self-control 0.41 0.77
Nutrition knowledge 0.70 0.70
Under age 45 0.40 0.44
White 0.84 0.75
Male 0.47 0.49
College degree (for age 25) 0.41 0.33 ≥
Income under 0.63 0.39
$50,000
sample population
US
Experiment
(2)
(1)
Table A2: Drinks Experiment: Descriptive Statistics
includes 1,267 participants.
Fusion, and Legacy in the baseline questions when told to imagine that gas is free. The experiment sample
(2020), respectively. Average WTP if gas is free is the respondent’s average valuation of the Accord, Altima,
hold Travel Survey (Oak Ridge National Laboratory undated) and U.S. Energy Information Administration
Surveys. US population average 2019 miles driven and 2019 gas price are from the 2017 National House-
Notes: US population averages for demographic variables are from the 2016–2020 American Community
Average baseline WTP ($/vehicle-year) 1,553
Average WTP if gas is free ($/vehicle-year) 2,771
2019 gas price ($/gallon) 2.79 2.60
2019 miles driven 10,803 11,131
Under age 45 0.41 0.44
White 0.70 0.75
Male 0.53 0.49
College degree (for age 25) 0.41 0.33 ≥
Income under 0.37 0.39
$50,000
sample population
US
Experiment
(2)
(1)
Table A1: Cars Experiment: Descriptive Statistics
C Data Appendix
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

Welfare?
Increase
”Nudges”
Do
When
deviations. The final four columns present p-values of t-tests of equality between each treatment condition and the control group.
Notes: This table presents tests of covariate balance between treatment conditions in the cars experiment. The first five columns present means and standard
F-test, number of observations 1024 1046 1022 1032
F-test of joint significance (p-value) 0.87 0.19 0.05* 0.67
64
N 530 494 516 492 502
(16.42) (15.45) (16.38) (16.25) (15.95)
Age 50.05 49.78 50.86 48.22 50.46 0.78 0.42 0.07* 0.68
(0.45) (0.46) (0.44) (0.48) (0.45)
White 0.72 0.69 0.73 0.63 0.73 0.32 0.57 0.00*** 0.77
(0.50) (0.50) (0.50) (0.50) (0.50)
Male 0.54 0.52 0.56 0.51 0.53 0.57 0.40 0.38 0.95
(0.49) (0.49) (0.48) (0.49) (0.50)
College degree 0.40 0.42 0.34 0.41 0.45 0.67 0.05** 0.72 0.13
(47.81) (46.87) (48.68) (48.11) (48.21)
Household income ($000s) 74.53 75.80 76.25 72.86 74.01 0.67 0.56 0.58 0.86
Variable Mean/SD Mean/SD Mean/SD Mean/SD Mean/SD (1)-(2) (1)-(3) (1)-(4) (1)-(5)
Control Full MPG Fuel cost Personalized fuel cost SmartWay P-value
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) T-test Appendix
Table A3: Cars Experiment: Covariate Balance
Online

65
t-tests of equality between each treatment condition and the control group.
The first four columns present means and standard deviations. The final three columns present p-values of
Notes: This table presents tests of covariate balance between treatment conditions in the drinks experiment.
F-test, number of observations 3924 3981 3954
F-test of joint significance (p-value) 0.45 0.02** 0.97
N 2001 1923 1980 1953
(16.59) (16.82) (16.49) (16.57)
Age 48.97 48.06 47.52 48.51 0.09* 0.01*** 0.38
(0.36) (0.36) (0.37) (0.36)
White 0.84 0.85 0.83 0.84 0.50 0.29 0.95
(0.50) (0.50) (0.50) (0.50)
Male 0.47 0.47 0.45 0.48 0.87 0.13 0.73
(0.49) (0.49) (0.49) (0.49)
College degree 0.41 0.41 0.40 0.41 0.80 0.69 0.88
(38.60) (39.35) (38.46) (38.70)
Household income ($000s) 47.10 47.73 47.53 47.14 0.61 0.72 0.97
Variable Mean/SD Mean/SD Mean/SD Mean/SD (1)-(2) (1)-(3) (1)-(4)
Control Nutrition Stop sign Graphic P-value
(1) (2) (3) (4) T-test
Table A4: Drinks Experiment: Covariate Balance
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

66
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

the top or bottom one percent.
67 change. Panel (a) instead keeps all observations, and Panel (b) instead drops only participants in
bottom five percent of annual gas cost, WTP if gas is free, estimated bias, or baseline-endline WTP
pairs j and MPL order. In the primary estimates in Table 1, we drop participants in the top or
models. All regressions also include controls for bias and externality as well as indicators for product
(12) and (16), respectively, while columns 3 and 4 present the full random coefficient (mixed effects)
pooling across all labels. Columns 1 and 2 present fixed coefficient (OLS) versions of equations
Notes: This table presents estimated ATEs, variances, and covariances for the cars experiment,
Number of observations 3,584 3,584 3,584 3,584
Number of participants 1,792 1,792 1,792 1,792
(standard error) (32,211)
Var(treatment effect) 67,262
(standard error) (1,150) (1,151)
Cov(externality, treatment effect) 1,366 1,364
(standard error) (79,411) (79,757)
Cov(bias, treatment effect) -45,322 -68,674
(0.89) (0.90)
Externality Treated 1.22 1.32 ×
(0.05) (0.05)
Bias Treated -0.04 -0.05 ×
(28.28) (52.93) (28.41) (52.94)
Treated -68.51** -122.34** -68.59** -123.65**
OLS OLS Mixed effects Mixed effects
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(b) Drop Top/Bottom One Percent
Number of observations 4,178 4,178 4,178 4,178
Number of participants 2,089 2,089 2,089 2,089
(standard error) (43,562)
Var(treatment effect) 49,896
(standard error) (4,980) (4,980)
Cov(externality, treatment effect) 11,050 11,062
(standard error) (2,664,671) (2,674,153)
Cov(bias, treatment effect) 2,378,734 2,413,063
(1.04) (1.04)
Externality Treated 1.94* 1.94* ×
(0.03) (0.03)
Bias Treated 0.03 0.03 ×
(31.72) (55.04) (31.69) (54.99)
Treated -75.71** -179.72*** -75.48** -179.66***
OLS OLS Mixed effects Mixed effects
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(a) Keep All Observations
Alternative Outlier Approaches
Table A5: Cars Experiment: Average Treatment Effects, Variance, and Covariance for
D Empirical Results Appendix
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

68
participants with below-median absolute value of relative WTP for both product pairs.
externality as well as indicators for product pairs j and MPL order. The samples are limited to
the full random coefficient (mixed effects) models. All regressions also include controls for bias and
coefficient (OLS) versions of equations (12) and (16), respectively, while columns 3 and 4 present
cars experiment and drinks experiment, pooling across all labels. Columns 1 and 2 present fixed
Notes: Panels (a) and (b), respectively, present estimated ATEs, variances, and covariances for the
Number of observations 2,949 2,949 2,949 2,949
Number of participants 983 983 983 983
(standard error) (0.122)
Var(treatment effect) 0.666
(standard error) (0.060) (0.060)
Cov(bias, treatment effect) 0.043 0.043
(0.04) (0.04)
Bias × Treated 0.03 0.03
(0.05) (0.10) (0.05) (0.10)
Treated -0.42*** -0.49*** -0.42*** -0.49***
OLS OLS Mixed effects Mixed effects
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(b) Drinks Experiment
Number of observations 964 964 964 964
Number of participants 482 482 482 482
(standard error) (18,691)
Var(treatment effect) 33,254
(standard error) (652) (650)
Cov(externality, treatment effect) -11 -7
(standard error) (18,988) (19,177)
Cov(bias, treatment effect) -24,083 -26,085
(1.36) (1.35)
Externality × Treated 0.43 0.47
(0.06) (0.06)
Bias × Treated -0.08 -0.09
(32.91) (77.30) (32.78) (77.04)
Treated -85.18*** -82.04 -85.01*** -82.08
OLS OLS Mixed effects Mixed effects
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(a) Cars Experiment
sumers
Table A6: Average Treatment Effects, Variance, and Covariance for “Marginal” Con-
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

69
and drinks experiment.
Notes: Panels (a) and (b), respectively, present the baseline demand curves for the cars experiment
Demand
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
-4
-2
0
Price
2
4
(b) Drinks Experiment
Demand
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
-1,500
Relative
-1,000
price
of
-500
0
lower-MPG
car
500
1,000
($/vehicle-year)
1,500
(a) Cars Experiment
Figure A7: Baseline Demand Curves
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

is included in the above-median category.
70
“Definitely,” “Mostly,” “Somewhat,” and “Not at all.” The median response was “mostly,” and this
soda pop or other sugar-sweetened beverages more often than I should.” There were four responses:
(GNKQ). Self-control was measured by people’s level of agreement with the statement, “I drink
knowledge was measured with 28 questions from the General Nutrition Knowledge Questionnaire
for subgroups with above- versus below-median nutrition knowledge and self-control. Nutrition
Notes: Panels (a) and (b), respectively, present estimates of equation (12) for the drinks experiment,
self-control self-control
All
Below-median Above-median
Treatment group
facts
Nutrition Stop sign Graphic Pooled
-.8
-.6 for
Treatment
sugary
-.4
effect
drinks
on
-.2
relative
0
($/12-pack)
WTP
.2
(b) Self-Control
nutrition knowledge nutrition knowledge
All
Below-median Above-median
Treatment group
facts
Nutrition Stop sign Graphic Pooled
-.8
-.6 for
Treatment
sugary
-.4
effect
drinks
on
-.2
relative
0
($/12-pack)
WTP
.2
(a) Nutrition Knowledge
Figure A8: Drinks Experiment: Treatment Effect Heterogeneity by Bias Proxies
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

71
containers with and without the labels.
present the distribution of responses to questions about why participants wanted to receive drink
tainers with or without the label shown to their treatment group. Panels (a) and (b), respectively,
receive 12-packs of sugary drinks. The survey then asked if they would prefer to receive drink con-
Notes: For this survey question, participants were told to assume that they had been selected to
Don't need government
Other Info isn't useful
Label is gross Makes me feel bad
Treatment group
Nutrition facts Stop sign Graphic
0
Percent
10
of
20
responses
30
that
40
selected
50
reason
(b) Reasons for Not Wanting Labels
Other
Reminder to drink less Info is useful
Treatment group
Nutrition facts Stop sign Graphic
0
Percent
of
20
responses 40
that
60
selected
reason 80
(a) Reasons for Wanting Labels
Figure A9: Reasons for Wanting or Not Wanting Sugary Drink Labels
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

72
j and MPL order.
All regressions also include controls for bias and externality as well as indicators for product pairs
(16), respectively, while columns 3 and 4 present the full random coefficient (mixed effects) models.
cars experiment. Columns 1 and 2 present fixed coefficient (OLS) versions of equations (12) and
Notes: Table presents estimated ATEs, variances, and covariances for the Full MPG label in the
Number of observations 1,024 1,024 1,024 1,024
Number of participants 512 512 512 512
(standard error) (17,339)
Var(treatment effect) 40,201
(standard error) (691) (691)
Cov(externality, treatment effect) -176 -165
(standard error) (27,033) (27,883)
Cov(bias, treatment effect) 17,438 12,019
(1.46) (1.46)
Externality × Treated -0.54 -0.46
(0.05) (0.05)
Bias × Treated 0.03 0.02
(31.53) (77.46) (31.57) (77.48)
Treated -68.52** -46.45 -67.85** -48.22
OLS OLS Mixed effects Mixed effects
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(Cars Experiment)
Table A7: Average Treatment Effects, Variance, and Covariance for Full MPG Label
D.1 Estimates of Table 1 by Label
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

73
j and MPL order.
All regressions also include controls for bias and externality as well as indicators for product pairs
(16), respectively, while columns 3 and 4 present the full random coefficient (mixed effects) models.
cars experiment. Columns 1 and 2 present fixed coefficient (OLS) versions of equations (12) and
Notes: Table presents estimated ATEs, variances, and covariances for the Average Cost label in the
Number of observations 1,046 1,046 1,046 1,046
Number of participants 523 523 523 523
(standard error) (17,155)
Var(treatment effect) 30,179
(standard error) (681) (682)
Cov(externality, treatment effect) 6 -19
(standard error) (27,589) (28,034)
Cov(bias, treatment effect) -6,702 -18,247
(1.41) (1.41)
Externality Treated 0.06 0.10 ×
(0.05) (0.05)
Bias Treated -0.01 -0.03 ×
(30.77) (77.22) (30.93) (77.31)
Treated -66.72** -68.19 -66.16** -66.70
OLS OLS Mixed effects Mixed effects
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(Cars Experiment)
Table A8: Average Treatment Effects, Variance, and Covariance for Average Cost Label
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

74
j and MPL order.
All regressions also include controls for bias and externality as well as indicators for product pairs
(16), respectively, while columns 3 and 4 present the full random coefficient (mixed effects) models.
the cars experiment. Columns 1 and 2 present fixed coefficient (OLS) versions of equations (12) and
Notes: Table presents estimated ATEs, variances, and covariances for the Personalized Cost label in
Number of observations 1,022 1,022 1,022 1,022
Number of participants 511 511 511 511
(standard error) (15,610)
Var(treatment effect) 13,549
(standard error) (663) (662)
Cov(externality, treatment effect) -171 -184
(standard error) (28,016) (28,448)
Cov(bias, treatment effect) -3,308 -7,453
(1.43) (1.42)
Externality Treated -0.35 -0.35 ×
(0.05) (0.05)
Bias Treated -0.00 -0.01 ×
(30.04) (76.28) (30.07) (75.99)
Treated -36.72 -18.67 -35.92 -16.92
OLS OLS Mixed effects Mixed effects
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Label (Cars Experiment)
Table A9: Average Treatment Effects, Variance, and Covariance for Personalized Cost
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

75
j and MPL order.
All regressions also include controls for bias and externality as well as indicators for product pairs
(16), respectively, while columns 3 and 4 present the full random coefficient (mixed effects) models.
cars experiment. Columns 1 and 2 present fixed coefficient (OLS) versions of equations (12) and
Notes: Table presents estimated ATEs, variances, and covariances for the SmartWay label in the
Number of observations 1,032 1,032 1,032 1,032
Number of participants 516 516 516 516
(standard error) (20,825)
Var(treatment effect) 36,295
(standard error) (676) (677)
Cov(externality, treatment effect) 160 174
(standard error) (29,008) (29,360)
Cov(bias, treatment effect) -15,166 -20,555
(1.38) (1.39)
Externality Treated 0.50 0.58 ×
(0.05) (0.05)
Bias Treated -0.03 -0.04 ×
(31.45) (75.55) (31.42) (75.64)
Treated -64.23** -85.65 -64.43** -89.12
OLS OLS Mixed effects Mixed effects
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(Cars Experiment)
Table A10: Average Treatment Effects, Variance, and Covariance for SmartWay Label
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

76
j and MPL order.
All regressions also include controls for bias and externality as well as indicators for product pairs
(16), respectively, while columns 3 and 4 present the full random coefficient (mixed effects) models.
the SSB experiment. Columns 1 and 2 present fixed coefficient (OLS) versions of equations (12) and
Notes: Table presents estimated ATEs, variances, and covariances for the stop sign warning label in
Number of observations 3,981 3,981 3,981 3,981
Number of participants 1,327 1,327 1,327 1,327
(standard error) (0.212)
Var(treatment effect) 0.355
(standard error) (0.063) (0.063)
Cov(bias, treatment effect) 0.108 0.108
(0.04) (0.04)
Bias × Treated 0.07* 0.07*
(0.05) (0.11) (0.05) (0.11)
Treated -0.34*** -0.53*** -0.34*** -0.53***
OLS OLS Mixed effects Mixed effects
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Label (SSB Experiment)
Table A12: Average Treatment Effects, Variance, and Covariance for Stop Sign Warning
j and MPL order.
All regressions also include controls for bias and externality as well as indicators for product pairs
(16), respectively, while columns 3 and 4 present the full random coefficient (mixed effects) models.
the SSB experiment. Columns 1 and 2 present fixed coefficient (OLS) versions of equations (12) and
Notes: Table presents estimated ATEs, variances, and covariances for the nutrition facts label in
Number of observations 3,924 3,924 3,924 3,924
Number of participants 1,308 1,308 1,308 1,308
(standard error) (0.224)
Var(treatment effect) 0.796
(standard error) (0.078) (0.078)
Cov(bias, treatment effect) 0.046 0.046
(0.05) (0.05)
Bias Treated 0.03 0.03 ×
(0.06) (0.13) (0.06) (0.13)
Treated -0.45*** -0.52*** -0.45*** -0.52***
OLS OLS Mixed effects Mixed effects
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Label (SSB Experiment)
Table A11: Average Treatment Effects, Variance, and Covariance for Nutrition Facts
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

77
In the data, Cov [ w̃, γ̂] 0.11. This is very similar to our primary estimate of 0.13. ≈
condition (ii) is plausible.
ij ij
condition (ii). In the drinks experiment, however, γ̂ is constructed independently of w , and thus
ij ij1 ij
γ̂ is constructed using baseline WTP w , and is thus mechanically correlated with ϵ̃ , violating
3.2.1, so this strategy is no more restrictive than our primary strategy. In the cars experiment,
Cov [τ, γ̂] = Cov [τ, γ] and (ii) Cov [ϵ̃, γ̂] = 0. Condition (i) follows from Assumption 1 in Section
From this equation, we see that two conditions are sufficient for Cov [ w̃, γ̂] = Cov [τ, γ]: (i)
ij ij ij ij
= Cov [τ , γ̂ ] + Cov [ϵ̃ , γ̂ ] . (75)
ij ij ij i ij ij
Cov [ w̃ , γ̂ ] = Cov [τ T + ϵ̃ , γ̂ ] (74) ·
Cov [ w̃, γ̂]:
ij
To see when Cov [ w̃, γ̂] = Cov [τ, γ], we substitute the model for w̃ from equation (12) into
mality assumptions from our primary strategy in Section 3.2.1.
the sample covariance between WTP change and bias. This strategy does not require the the nor-
In this appendix, we consider an alternative strategy to estimating Cov [τ, γ]: we estimate Cov [ w̃, γ̂],
D.2 Alternate Covariance Estimation Strategy for the Drinks Experiment
j and MPL order.
All regressions also include controls for bias and externality as well as indicators for product pairs
(16), respectively, while columns 3 and 4 present the full random coefficient (mixed effects) models.
the SSB experiment. Columns 1 and 2 present fixed coefficient (OLS) versions of equations (12) and
Notes: Table presents estimated ATEs, variances, and covariances for the graphic warning label in
Number of observations 3,954 3,954 3,954 3,954
Number of participants 1,318 1,318 1,318 1,318
(standard error) (0.264)
Var(treatment effect) 1.080
(standard error) (0.082) (0.082)
Cov(bias, treatment effect) 0.234 0.233
(0.05) (0.05)
Bias Treated 0.15*** 0.15*** ×
(0.06) (0.15) (0.06) (0.15)
Treated -0.51*** -0.90*** -0.51*** -0.90***
OLS OLS Mixed effects Mixed effects
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Label (SSB Experiment)
Table A13: Average Treatment Effects, Variance, and Covariance for Graphic Warning
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

78
drinks. Standard errors are in parentheses.
given the parameters reported above. “Unit” is “vehicle-year” for cars and “12-pack” for sugary
as reported in Table 2. ∆W (t = 0) and ∆W (t = t ) are computed using equations (19) and (20),
∗
p
E E
each experiment. Bias [γ], externality [ϕ], demand slope D , pass-through ρ, and markup µ are
′
Notes: This table presents parameter estimates and total surplus effects separately for each label in
∆W (t = t ) −0.06 −0.04 −0.11
∗
∆W (t = 0) 0.12 0.10 0.10
Cov [ϕ, τ ] 0.00 0.00 0.00
(0.08) (0.06) (0.08)
Cov [γ, τ ] 0.04 0.11 0.24
(0.22) (0.21) (0.26)
V ar [τ ] 0.80 0.35 1.08
(0.06) (0.05) (0.06)
E
[τ ] −0.45 −0.34 −0.51
Parameter Nutrition facts Stop sign warning Graphic warning
(1) (2) (3)
(b) Drinks Experiment
∆W (t = t ) 1.89 0.51 1.33 −19.04
∗
∆W (t = 0) −14.14 6.69 3.42 5.99
(691) (682) (662) (677)
Cov [ϕ, τ ] 174 −165 −19 −184
(27, 883) (28, 034) (28, 448) (29, 360)
Cov [γ, τ ] 12, 019 −18, 247 −7, 453 −20, 555
(17, 339) (17, 155) (15, 610) (20, 825)
V ar [τ ] 40, 201 30, 179 13, 549 36, 295
(32) (31) (30) (31)
E
[τ ] −69 −67 −37 −64
Parameter Full MPG Average cost Personalized cost SmartWay
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(a) Cars Experiment
Table A14: Parameters and Welfare Analysis: Individual Labels
E Welfare Analysis Appendix
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

79
2 p
E
gain from the optimal tax t = [δ + στ ] µ is t D . − − 1 ∗ ∗2 ′
using equations (19) and (20), given the other parameters reported in Table 2. The total surplus
E
tions for the expected sum of bias plus externalities [δ]. The total surplus effects are computed
Notes: This figure presents the effects of labels and taxes on total surplus under alternative assump-
Tax (w/ label) Label (w/ tax)
Tax (w/o label) Label (w/o tax)
Bias + externality ($/12-pack)
-8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8
-1
0
Total
1
surplus
2
gain
3
4
($/12-pack)
5
Estimated value
(b) Drinks Experiment
Tax (w/ label) Label (w/ tax)
Tax (w/o label) Label (w/o tax)
Bias + externality ($/vehicle-year)
-400 -300 -200 -100 0 100 200 300 400
-20
-10
Total
0
surplus
10
gain
20
30
40
($/vehicle-year)
50
Estimated value
(a) Cars Experiment
Figure A10: Total Surplus Under Alternative Bias + Externality Assumptions
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?

80
Online Appendix When Do ”Nudges” Increase Welfare?