AEA Papers and Proceedings 2020, 110: 269–273
https://doi.org/10.1257/pandp.20201017
Advance Market Commitments:
Insights from Theory and Experience†
By Michael Kremer, Jonathan Levin, and Christopher M. Snyder*
Ten years ago, donors committed $1.5 bil- The AMC is designed to tackle static and
lion to a pilot advance market commitment dynamic distortions in the vaccine market.
AMC to help purchase pneumococcal vaccine The price-cap feature of the AMC is designed
( )
for low-income countries. The AMC aimed to to mitigate static deadweight loss from firms
encourage the development of such vaccines, exercising market power. Donors’ commitment
ensure distribution to children in l ow-income to top-up price above marginal cost is designed
countries, and pilot the AMC mechanism for to bolster dynamic R&D incentives, which are
possible future use. Three vaccines have been weak due to a number of factors, including lim-
developed and more than 150 million children ited purchasing power in low-income countries,
immunized, saving an estimated 700,000 lives. free riding by the unvaccinated on the reduction
This paper reviews the economic logic behind in disease transmission, and political pressure to
AMCs, the experience with the pilot, and key reduce price once a vaccine has been developed,
issues for future AMCs. causing a holdup problem.
AMCs’ “pull” funding is meant to supple-
I. Theory of AMCs ment, not replace, direct R&D support i.e.,
(
“push” funding while mitigating problems
)
A. Technologically Distant Target attendant with trying to pick winning projects ex
ante under asymmetric information.
Kremer and Glennerster 2004 proposed
( )
AMCs to encourage research on vaccines B. Technologically Close Target
against diseases such as malaria primarily
affecting low-income countries and to promote The original AMC concept was translated into
access to these vaccines once developed. The an actionable proposal in a Center for Global
AMC has donors pledge to top-up payments for Development working group report Levine,
(
newly introduced vaccines meeting technical Kremer, and Albright 2005 . The group sug-
)
benchmarks, conditional on the firm setting the gested conducting AMCs for both technologi-
price close to marginal cost. cally distant and technologically close targets.
There are several important theoretical distinc-
tions between these targets.
First, the further a vaccine is along its devel-
opment path into clinical trials, the less R&D
remains to be undertaken. The key challenge
* Kremer: Department of Economics, Harvard University,
switches from incentivizing R&D to incentiviz-
and NBER email: mkremer@fas.harvard.edu; Levin:
Graduate Sch ( ool of Business, Stanford Univer ) sity, and ing adequate capacity to bring usage to socially
NBER email: jdlevin@stanford.edu; Snyder: Department efficient levels. Vaccine capacity is expensive.
( )
of Economics, Dartmouth College, and NBER ( email: chris. Whether to avoid holdup of the substantial
snyder@dartmouth.edu. The authors were members of
) capacity investment required in a bargaining
the Economic Expert Group that helped to design the pilot (
advance market commitment for pneumococcus vaccine. model or to leverage monopsony power in
) (
We are grateful to Arthur Baker and Junyi Que for excellent a price-theoretic model , a robust theoretical
)
research assistance and Owen Barder, Rachel Glennerster, finding is that firms will tend to underinvest in
and Orin Levine for insightful comments.
capacity absent an AMC.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/pandp.20201017 to visit
Second, the nature of the information asym-
the article page for additional materials and author disclo-
sure statements. metry between firms and AMC funders may
( )
269

270 AEA PAPERS AND PROCEEDINGS MAY 2020
change with technological distance. For a tech- PCV covering disease strains prevalent in devel-
nologically distant vaccine, the funder may oped countries already existed, and PCVs cov-
know little about the nature and viability of the ering the strains in developing countries were in
technology, giving the researchers asymmetric late-stage clinical trials, so this was a technolog-
information about its chance of success. For a ically close target.
technologically close vaccine, published clinical In 2009, the AMC launched under the super-
trials may inform the funder about the product’s vision of GAVI formerly the Global Alliance
(
viability, closing that information gap. However, for Vaccines and Immunizations . The design
)
as the firm solidifies its production process, it called for firms to compete for t en-year supply
may instead gain asymmetric information about contracts, capping the price at $3.50 per dose.
its costs. A firm committing to supply X million annual
Third, product characteristics are more pre- doses X 200 of the projected 200 million
( /
dictable and easily understood for technolog- annual need would secure an X 200 share of the
) /
ically close products. Country co-payments $1.5 billion AMC fund, paid out as a per-dose
provide an important market test for techno- subsidy for initial purchases. The AMC covered
logically distant products, preventing resources the 73 countries below an income threshold for
from being wasted on products meeting techni- GAVI eligibility. Country c o-payments were set
cal specifications but not consumer needs. This according to standard GAVI rules. Countries
test may not be needed for technologically close were required to have 70 percent coverage with
products. DPT vaccine to obtain pneumococcus vaccine
under the program.
C. Modeling AMC Design In 2010, GAVI set the first tender for 60 mil-
lion doses. GSK and Pfizer each committed to
Kremer, Levin, and Snyder 2019 devel- supply 30 million doses annually at $3.50 per
( )
ops a model of AMC design that illuminates dose, or $10.50 for a 3-dose course these and
(
many of these issues. The model focuses on subsequent facts from AMC Secretariat of Gavi
the holdup problem: firms invest in R&D and 2019 . GAVI issued subsequent tenders over
( ))
capacity before bargaining with purchasers over time, sometimes outpaced by country demand.
price and quantity. Purchasers expropriate some In each case, the firms expanded their supply
investment returns in bargaining, leading the commitments in line with the tenders. There has
firm to underinvest. The firm may not develop been purchaser and public pressure for the man-
the vaccine at all; if it does, it will underinvest in ufacturers to reduce their prices, which currently
capacity to serve low-income countries. are down to $2.90 per dose. In 2019, a third vac-
An AMC that commits to a subsidy policy cine developed by the Serum Institute of India
prior to the firm’s investment helps address the qualified for the AMC program. The Serum
inefficiency. However, the design matters: if the Institute is expected to participate in tenders
AMC merely sets a per-dose subsidy, a monop- for the remaining $262 million of uncommitted
oly supplier can claim the entire AMC fund with AMC funds, reportedly pricing its vaccine at $2
its low equilibrium capacity. Increasing capac- per dose for low-income countries.
ity merely increases the rate at which funds are By 2016, PCV was distributed in 60 of the
received. As Kremer, Levin, and Snyder 2019 73 eligible countries, and annual distribu-
( )
shows, a better solution ties AMC funds to tion exceeded 160 million doses, enough to
capacity commitments. immunize over 50 million children per year.
As Figure 1 in the online Appendix shows,
II. Pneumococcal Pilot AMC by 2018, nearly half of the target child popu-
lation in GAVI countries was covered. While
In 2007, five countries and the Gates coverage is far from full, it is higher than in
Foundation pledged $1.5 billion toward a pilot non-GAVI countries. A key reason why the
AMC targeting a pneumococcal conjugate vac- fraction of the population covered is smaller
cine PCV . The World Health Organization than the fraction of countries covered is that
( )
WHO estimated pneumococcus killed more India, by far the most populous GAVI country,
( )
than 700,000 children under five in developing did not adopt PCV until 2017 and currently
countries annually at that time WHO 2007 . A runs only a limited program in five states.
( )

VOL. 110 ADVANCE MARKET COMMITMENTS: INSIGHTS FROM THEORY AND EXPERIENCE 271
Estimates from Tasslimi et al. 2011 suggest The online Appendix provides a range of
( )
that the PCV rollout has been highly cost effec- calibrations quantifying the asymmetry of the
tive. At initial program prices, the PCV rollout loss function. For example, assuming the AMC
avoided the loss of a disability-adjusted life year designer sought to maximize health benefit
DALY at a cost of only $83. The WHO clas- with the available funds, correctly anticipated
( )
sifies interventions as highly cost effective if a the speed of rollout under the AMC, and used
DALY costs less than one GDP per capita. money saved from lower vaccine prices for
Evidence on the cost effectiveness of PCV other health interventions at the WHO thresh-
does not prove the cost effectiveness of the over- old for highly cost-effective interventions,
all AMC, because we lack a valid counterfac- the $3.50 price set in the pilot dominates a $2
tual. We do not know, absent an AMC, whether price even if the lower price generated only a
and when vaccines would have been developed, 4 percent risk that the firms refuse to partici-
how much push funding would have been spent, pate although the precise figure is sensitive to
(
or what prices would have been set. However, assumptions about alternative uses of savings .
)
the high cost effectiveness of PCV implies that Analogous calculations can show that if there
the AMC would have been worthwhile were were even a small chance that lower co-pay-
there even a small chance that it sped up PCV ments would have led India or other countries
adoption. to adopt sooner, this would have substantially
Some insight on the effect of the AMC- increased the expected number of lives saved
promoted capacity and adoption can be gained through the program.
by comparing PCV to rotavirus vaccine, for While some activists have argued that the
which GAVI supported purchases over a sim- $3.50 paid per dose exceeds manufacturing
ilar time period without an AMC. Figure 2 in costs, the relevant issue for AMC designers is
the online Appendix shows that the rate of vac- not manufacturing costs but firms’ reservation
cine coverage in GAVI countries converged to values. Their reservation values may substan-
the global rate almost five years faster for PCV. tially exceed manufacturing costs for several
At the same time, shortages of rotavirus vac- reasons: the AMC top up may not fully defray
cine were more severe than shortages of PCV, their capacity costs, or they may fear that offer-
suggesting that firms expanded capacity faster ing a low AMC price would lead higher-income
for PCV than for rotavirus vaccine. countries to press for price reductions.
While these factors imply ex ante optimal
III. Design Issues prices will exceed expected production costs,
the facts that both firms participated even
A. Country Co-payments, Pricing, Coverage though one likely had substantially higher
manufacturing costs and that both continued to
AMC designers do not know manufacturers’ participate at $2.90 per dose suggests that at
reservation price for installing adequate capacity least one firm would likely have participated at
to supply needed vaccines or countries’ willing- a lower price.
ness to provide co-payments. Because the bene- Still, prices for PCV are much lower under the
fits of vaccines far exceed their production costs, AMC than outside it. Currently, l ower-income
AMC designers face an asymmetric loss func- countries in the Americas pay $12 or more
tion in setting firm prices and country co-pay- per dose WHO 2019 ; the US Centers for
( )
ments. Offering firms less than their reservation Disease Control and Prevention CDC pay
( )
value or asking countries to make co-payments $137 CDC 2019 . As we show in Figure 3 in
( )
greater than their willingness to pay risks chil- the online Appendix, the percentage discount
dren not receiving lifesaving vaccines. This is GAVI receives compared to various global price
very costly relative to what the donor can save measures is deeper for PCV than for almost any
by paying firms somewhat less or charging other vaccine.
countries somewhat more, so maximizing social Extending AMC participation beyond
welfare under uncertainty requires paying firms GAVI-eligible countries could have saved more
more than the expected cost of the vaccine and lives, although it is possible that manufacturers
setting country co-payments below the expected would have demanded higher prices for a pro-
marginal cost. gram covering higher-income countries if they

272 AEA PAPERS AND PROCEEDINGS MAY 2020
thought this would have cut into sales at higher C. Political Economy of Target Choice
prices or put pressure on pricing in higher-in-
come countries. Policymakers may wish to explore future
AMCs with different design features. Kremer,
B. Number of Firms Levin, and Snyder 2019 argues that focusing
( )
on a technologically more distant target might
A program with lower co-payments, more generate larger overall benefits. However, politi-
generous country inclusion rules, and faster cal factors may favor technologically closer tar-
issuance of tenders for the full AMC amount gets. Firms that have a product close to market
could potentially have generated greater health have stronger incentives to engage politically
benefits up to now. than firms with early-stage ideas for distant
However, holding back some funds for later targets. Moreover, while an AMC for a distant
tenders may have helped incentivize entry by product does not impose substantial financial
the Serum Institute although the product also costs unless a product is developed, politicians
(
received substantial push funding . The Serum looking for a “win” may be reluctant to expend
)
Institute’s vaccine is somewhat cheaper to pro- significant effort on a project that only pays off
duce than previous PCVs, but the chief benefit once they have left office, if at all.
of this entry likely comes from inducing greater One solution might be to simultaneously
competition in the market outside of GAVI launch a bundle of AMCs that includes some
countries and in the G AVI-country market after eye-catching long-term targets with some
the AMC ends. Another benefit is that India may short-term targets that will deliver quick wins.
decide to expand its heretofore limited partici- When technologically close targets are chosen,
pation in response to the entry of a domestic there are further political considerations. There
supplier. may be strong industry lobbying around product
A key issue for future AMCs will be whether specifications to include their approaches and
to split the AMC among multiple suppliers and exclude potential rivals’. If the process involves
reserve tenders for future entrants, as did the first selecting a disease target and then design-
pilot pneumococcus AMC, or to concentrate ing the AMC details, more weight in the second
incentives on a single supplier, as envisioned stage will be put on getting the product to market
in Kremer and Glennerster 2004 . Sponsors than saving money that is already earmarked. It
( )
of the AMC pilot prioritized entry of multi- may be possible to address some of these con-
ple vaccines because they saw competition cerns by broadening the set of possible targets
as essential for holding down long-run prices or having several groups design AMCs targeting
and avoiding supply interruptions. Kremer and different products and using competitive mecha-
Glennerster 2004 prioritized the development nisms to decide which receives funding.
( )
of a vaccine where none currently existed, rely-
ing on the price cap, to which the firm agrees IV. Conclusions
to access AMC funds, to keep prices near mar-
ginal cost over the long term. Penalty clauses The AMC moved from theory to practice in its
could be specified to mitigate supply interrup- first decade, and we now have a decade of learn-
tions. Development of yet more advanced vac- ing from the pneumococcal pilot. While aspects
cines could be incentivized through subsequent of program evaluation are complicated, the best
AMCs. estimates suggest that the introduction of PCV
For distant technological targets, incentiviz- saved 700,000 lives at a highly favorable cost.
ing a sequence of entrants reduces incentives Iterations likely could improve AMC design,
for the first vaccine to enter. Thus, structuring just as market designs have been refined in set-
a program to incentivize multiple entrants may tings such as school choice and radio spectrum
substantially increase total costs. On the other allocation. Policymakers may wish to consider
hand, the design and enforcement of long-term offering a set of AMCs, perhaps each smaller in
contracts that hold prices close to marginal scale than the pilot pneumococcus AMC, where
cost and assure consistent supply through pen- potential targets could range beyond health to
alty clauses for supply interruptions may be address agricultural or sustainability problems
difficult. specific to developing countries.

VOL. 110 ADVANCE MARKET COMMITMENTS: INSIGHTS FROM THEORY AND EXPERIENCE 273
REFERENCES Christopher M. Snyder. 2019. “Designing
an Advanced Market Commitment for New
Advance Market Commitments Secretariat of Vaccines.” https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/
Gavi. 2019. Advance Market Commitment for kremer/files/amc_design_36.pdf.
Pneumococcal Vaccines: Annual Report 1 Jan- Levine, Ruth, Michael Kremer, and Alice Albright.
uary – 21 December 2018. Geneva: Gavi, the 2005. Making Markets for Vaccines: Ideas to
Vaccine Alliance. Action. Washington, DC: Center for Global
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Development.
2019. CDC Vaccine Price List. https://www. Tasslimi, Azadeh, Mari M. Nakamura, Orin
cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/vfc/awardees/ Levine, Maria D. Knoll, Louise B. Russell, and
vaccine-management/price-list/index.html Anushua Sinha. 2011. “Cost Effectiveness of
accessed February 20, 2020 . Child Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccination
( )
Kremer, Michael, and Rachel Glennerster. 2004. in GAVI-Eligible Countries.” International
Strong Medicine: Creating Incentives for Health 3 4 : 259–69.
( )
Pharmaceutical Research on Neglected Dis- World Health Organization. 2007. “Pneumococ-
eases. Princeton: Princeton University Press. cal Conjugate Vaccine for Childhood Immu-
Kremer, Michael, Jonathan Levin, and nization – WHO Position Paper.” Weekly
Epidemiological Record 82 12 : 93–104.
( )