NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ECONOMIC VS. EPIDEMIOLOGICAL APPROACHES TO MEASURING THE HUMAN
CAPITAL IMPACTS OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE ELIMINATION
Caroline Chuard
Hannes Schwandt
Alexander D. Becker
Masahiko Haraguchi
Working Paper 30202
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30202
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2022
Corresponding author: Hannes Schwandt (schwandt@northwestern.edu). The authors
acknowledge support from the Value of Vaccination Research Network (Gates Foundation) in
collaboration with Steve Elledge (Harvard University) and Michael Mina (eMed; Harvard
University at project start). We are grateful to David Bloom, David Cutler, Atheendar
Venkataramani, Casper Worm Hansen, and seminar participants at the Center for Disease Control
(CDC), Harvard School of Public Health, Barcelona Summer Forum, and AEA Annual Meeting
for comments. All of Alex Becker's work on this paper was carried out when he was employed at
the Stanford Biology Department or the Johns Hopkins School of Public Health. This paper does
not represent the views of his current employer (Merck). The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Caroline Chuard, Hannes Schwandt, Alexander D. Becker, and Masahiko Haraguchi.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Economic vs. Epidemiological Approaches to Measuring the Human Capital Impacts of Infectious
Disease Elimination
Caroline Chuard, Hannes Schwandt, Alexander D. Becker, and Masahiko Haraguchi
NBER Working Paper No. 30202
July 2022
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
A rich economic literature has examined the human capital impacts of disease-eliminating health
interventions, such as the rollout of new vaccines. This literature is based on reduced-form
approaches which exploit proxies for disease burden, such as mortality, instead of actual infection
counts, which are difficult to measure. We develop an epidemiological dynamic accounting model
based on the susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) framework to derive precise measles infection
shares across U.S. cohorts born around the introduction of the measles vaccine. Measles is highly
infectious and fully immunizing which makes the disease an ideal candidate for epidemiological
modeling. Our epidemiological model is strongly predictive of future measles outbreaks but the
derived measles infection shares are not systematically related to cohorts' later educational,
economic, or health outcomes. The reduced-form approach, on the other hand, shows that these
long-term outcomes strongly improved among vaccinated cohorts in states with high pre-vaccine
measles mortality. Our results suggest that differences in disease severity are more relevant for
long-term human capital impacts than raw differences in actual infection rates, supporting the
reduced-form approach used in the economic literature.
Caroline Chuard Alexander D. Becker
University of St. Gallen alexdavidbecker@gmail.com
Varnbüelstrasse 14
St. Gallen 9000 Masahiko Haraguchi
Switzerland Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
caroline.chuard@unisg.ch Harvard University
677 Huntington Avenue
Hannes Schwandt Boston, MA 02115
School of Education and Social Policy mharaguchi@hsph.harvard.edu
Northwestern University
2120 Campus Drive
Evanston, Il 60208
and NBER
schwandt@northwestern.edu

1 Introduction
Epidemiological models of disease spread have become of increasing interest
foreconomistsanalyzingthedynamicsandsocietalimpactsoftheCOVID-19
pandemic (Murray, 2020). But there has been limited use outside the current
pandemic context, despite a rich and well-established literature in economics
studying the impacts of disease spread on human capital accumulation and
economic long-term outcomes.1 Papers from this literature typically use
reduced-formapproachesthatexploitpublichealthinterventionswithafocus
on the general severity of the pre-intervention disease environment, which
is often proxied by pre-intervention mortality. But mortality might be a
suboptimal proxy to measure a disease’s long-term effects in the surviving
population. Epidemiological models, in comparison, have the advantage that
they can account for actual infection rates across cohorts. In this paper, we
develop an epidemiological accounting model to compare the two approaches
analyzing the long-term impacts of measles surrounding the measles vaccine
introduction to the United States in the early 1960s.
Measles provide a useful context to assess the value of epidemiological
modeling for the analysis of the economic consequences of disease spread.
First, while measles infections can lead to immediate serious illness, they are
also understood to partially eliminate previously obtained immunity to other
childhood diseases leading to higher incidence of non-measles disease after
a measles infection (Gadroen et al., 2018; Mina et al., 2015, 2019; Petrova
et al., 2019). This impact on secondary infections makes measles spread
an important driver of childhood sickness, with the potential of long-term
consequences for human capital development (Atwood, 2022; Driessen et al.,
2015; Nandi et al., 2019). Second, measles is extremely infectious with an R0
of 16 or higher (Guerra et al., 2017) and it is fully immunizing.2 The high
1See, for example, Acemoglu and Johnson (2007); Ager et al. (2018); Bhalotra and
Venkataramani(2015);Bleakley(2007,2010);Bu¨tikoferandSalvanes(2020);Cutleretal.
(2010); Egedesø et al. (2020); Jayachandran et al. (2010); Lazuka (2020); Lucas (2010).
2R0 refers to the number of people infected by a single contagious individual in a fully
2

infectiousness implies that in an unvaccinated, fully susceptible population
virtually everyone will be infected during the first years of life. Hence there
is no socio-economic selection into infections and variation in infection rates
at a given point in time are largely driven by the recent location-specific
outbreak history. Moreover, the full immunization allows for better epidemi-
ological accounting and a more precise assignment of observed cases across
population groups. In sum, measles is understood to be a central driver of
severe childhood sickness and is relatively easily accountable, providing a
good case for the use of epidemiological modeling to measure the long-term
human capital impacts of disease spread.
Ouranalysis relieson measlescasecounts between 1950and 1980 thatare
available at the state level but without age information. We combine these
counts with demographic data on births and population sizes to build an
epidemiological dynamic accounting model which distributes observed cases
across cohorts in each state. We show that the resulting measles distribu-
tions are highly predictive of future outbreaks in line with epidemiological
Susceptible, Infectious, Recovered (SIR) models, corroborating the mechan-
ics of our accounting framework. In contrast, the economic reduced-form ap-
proachusingpre-interventionmeaslesmortalityrateshasnopredictivepower
of year-to-year outbreaks. We then use the accounting model to calculate the
shares in each birth cohort that have ever been infected with measles. Fi-
nally, we estimate the impact of measles on long-term outcomes measured
in the Census and the American Community Survey (ACS) comparing the
epidemiological modeling approach and the reduced-form approach.
Linking outcomes in adulthood to measles infections in early childhood
measuredbythebaselineepidemiologicalaccountingmodelindicatesstrongly
negative impacts on a broad range of adult outcomes. Cohorts with lower
shares of people ever infected with measles have lower high school dropout
rates, higher family income, and are less dependent on welfare income and
susceptible population.
3

food stamps. However, the variation in measles infection shares identifying
these effects largely covaries with overall cohort trends and these estimated
long-term effects are not robust to the inclusion of cohort fixed effects. The
economic reduced-form approach, on the other hand, yields similar estimates
asthebaselineepidemiologicalmodelandisfullyrobusttocontrollingflexibly
forcohorttrends. Thereducedformapproachalsohasmorepredictivepower
of medium-term cohort mortality.
Focusing on the reduced-form approach, we extend the analysis to health
outcomes that are observed in the ACS. We find positive impacts of measles
reductions on a broad set of physical health difficulties, including work dis-
ability and difficulties with daily physical functioning.
Overall, our analysis suggests that the severity of the disease environment
is a central factor determining early life impacts that persist throughout the
life course – variation that is captured by the reduced-form approach. Dif-
ferences in overall infection rates captured by the epidemiological approach
that do not account for the severity of the disease burden are less consistently
associatedwithlong-termoutcomes. Notably, theepidemiologicalmodelper-
forms well in predicting year-to-year fluctuations in measles cases but this
variation is not the relevant margin for impacts on child development.
Given its extremely high contagiousness and full immunization, measles
provide an upper bound for the power of epidemiological modeling to mea-
sure the long-term effects of disease spread. Diseases that spread less aggres-
sively or infect people numerous times over their lifetime, such as influenza
or COVID-19, are much more difficult to model. Our analysis therefore pro-
videsstrongsupportfortheuseofreduced-formapproachesthatfocusonthe
severity of the disease environment when measuring the long-term benefits
of disease reduction (Acemoglu and Johnson, 2007; Ager et al., 2018; Bhalo-
tra and Venkataramani, 2015; Bleakley, 2007, 2010; Bu¨tikofer and Salvanes,
2020; Cutler et al., 2010; Egedesø et al., 2020; Jayachandran et al., 2010;
Lazuka, 2020; Lucas, 2010). We discuss these approaches in more detail in
4

Section 3.2.
Our results further contribute to a concentrated economic and public
health literature that has focused on the human capital consequences of
measlesinfections. Ourreduced-formresultsarestronglyinlinewithAtwood
(2022) who studies the long-term effects of the measles vaccine introduction
in the United States using a similar reduced-form approach (see Section 3.2
for a more detailed discussion). Positive long-term effects of measles vaccina-
tion have also been found for developing countries, such as Ethiopia, India,
Vietnam, and Bangladesh (Driessen et al., 2015; Nandi et al., 2019).
Finally, our findings are relevant for policies aimed at increasing vacci-
nation rates in low-income countries and maintaining high coverage in high-
income countries (Ba¨rnighausen et al., 2014b; Bloom et al., 2021; Nandi et
al., 2020). Our analysis suggests that, from a child development perspective,
vaccination efforts are particularly beneficial in contexts with high measles
and childhood mortality – conditions that are nowadays mostly found in de-
veloping countries. At the same time, measles outbreaks in high-incomes
context can be very disruptive reducing the educational inputs of those who
fall sick and among healthy students if schools have to shut down to con-
tain outbreaks.3 Overall, our analysis emphasizes the central role of measles
vaccination for child development around the world.
2 Data
Our analysis draws on several data sets. The first set of data concerns the
input parameters for the epidemiological and the reduced-form models. Our
epidemiologicalmodelisbasedonmeaslescountsfromweeklyU.S.“notifiable
diseases” reports obtained from Project Tycho (Van Panhuis et al., 2013)
3For news reports on recent school closures in response to measles outbreaks, see,
for example: www.nytimes.com/2019/04/15/nyregion/measles-nyc-yeshiva-closing.html
andwww.sciencealert.com/the-clark-county-measles-outbreak-is-now-forcing-hundreds-of-
kids-to-miss-school.
5

and linked to the Vital Statistics birth counts (Bailey et al., 2016). For
vaccinationratesintheintroductionperiodwerelyontheU.S.-widenumbers
provided by Orenstein and Hinman (1999) and Orenstein et al. (2004). The
reduced-form approach, instead, is based on measles mortality data from
the Vital Statistics (National Center for Health Statistics, 1959–1978). The
second set of data informs about our outcomes. Specifically, we rely on the
US Census records in 2000 and the American Community Survey (ACS)
in the years 2001–2019 (Ruggles et al., 2015) for long-term human capital
accumulation of individuals born from 1950–1980.
2.1 Measles counts, birth, and mortality data
Measles counts. The Project Tycho data (Van Panhuis et al., 2013) provide
weekly reports of all nationally notifiable diseases for U.S. cities and states
from1888to2011. Forthecaseofmeasles,thedatacontainweeklystate-level
counts of measles cases and incidence rates per 100,000 inhabitants between
1928 to 2003, summing up to a total of 18,670,996 reported individual cases.
Figure 1 plots weekly incidence rates for the overall United States over time,
with the red dashed line indicating 1963, the year the measles vaccine was
first introduced. As it can be seen, a large outbreak occurred in 1964, but
incidenceratesquicklydroppedinthefollowingyearsreachinglowlevelsclose
to zero in 1968. Only very small annual outbreaks are observed between 1970
and1980,whiletherearezeroreportedmeaslescasesinmostweeksafter1980
with only a few isolated small spikes in the following two decades.
Figure 2 plots annual measles incidence rates across all 51 U.S. states.
There are three important observations. First, average incidence levels in
the period before the vaccine introduction are very different across states,
suggesting that there might be large differences in reporting rates. Second,
the timing of measles outbreaks (peak years) is different across states. Third,
while most states experience a strong reduction in incidence rates around the
introduction of the vaccine, there is considerable variation in the year when
6

the last visible outbreak occurred.
Birth data. To build an epidemiological dynamic accounting model which
distributes observed measles cases across cohorts in each state, we also need
demographic data on births. Therefore, we rely on US county-level natality
data starting in 1915 provided by Bailey et al. (2016) and aggregate these
data to the state level.
Mortality data. For the economic reduced-form approach, instead, we
need measles mortality data. We therefore use individual-level death counts
at the state-level containing information on the cause of death from 1959 to
1979 from the National Vital Statistics System National Center for Health
Statistics.4
2.2 Long-term human capital and health outcomes
Long-term human capital data. The 2000 Census and the American Commu-
nity Surveys from 2001–2019 (Ruggles et al., 2015) provide information on
the demographics, educational attainment, labor market outcomes, welfare
dependency, and long-run health status. Demographic information contains
the birthplace as well as the year of birth.5 This information is crucial in
order to align individuals with the level of the treatment (state and year of
birth).
Educational information is measured by the respondents’ highest year of
school or degree completed. We then construct a high school completion
dummy indicating, whether an individual has finished the 12th grade or
more. As economic and labor market outcomes, we include respondents’
employment status in the week prior to the survey as well as log household
income (in real 2010 U.S. dollars).
4ThecauseofdeathisrecordedaccordingtotheInternationalClassificationofDiseases
(ICD) Revision 7 in the years 1959–1967 and Revision 8 for the years 1968–1979.
5The year of birth has been calculated by subtracting age from the survey year intro-
ducing an important source of measurement error (the 2000 Census takes place on April
1, while the ACS is administered throughout the year).
7

Wealsoconstructthreebinarymeasuresrepresentingwelfaredependency,
indicating (1) household income below the federal poverty line (2) receipt of
welfare income at the individual level, and (3) receipt of food stamps at the
family level.
Health outcomes. The Census and the ACS include two types of measures
of respondents’ health status: a binary variable indicating work disability
(only available up to 2007), and a set of five disability questions (reporting
cognitive, ambulatory, independent living, self-care, and vision or hearing
complications) that we summarize in an equally weighted disability index.
Finally, in order to test our two models against each other for a measure
where we have good theoretical predictions, we also study mortality as an
outcome. In this analysis, we calculate two versions of mortality rates per
1,000 births by cumulating measles specific and overall deaths for the ages 0
to 5 for each specific birth cohort and diving by the number of births of the
respective birth cohort.6
2.3 Sample restrictions and descriptive statistics
We restrict our sample to individuals born from 1950 to 1980 in the United
States,excludingAlaska,Delaware,DistrictofColumbia,Hawaii,Massachusetts,
Nevada, North Dakota, Oregon, Rhode Island, and Wyoming which are ex-
cludedduetomissingdatainbirthcounts(AlaskaandHawaii), measlesmor-
tality data (Delaware, District of Columbia, Nevada, North Dakota, Oregon,
Rhode Island, and Wyoming), or measles incidence data (Massachusetts).
With these restriction we yield a sample of 21,473,682 observations. The
2000 Census is a 5% sample of the US population and therefore contributes
the most with 4,912,526 observations. The 2001–2004 ACS capture around
394,000 observations each year. Finally, the ACS from 2005–2019 are a 1-
6Using this measure as an outcome reduces our number of observations drastically, as
(1) our cells are then on the level of state-of-birth x year-of birth and as (2) we can only
include birth cohorts 1959–1973 due to data availability.
8

in-100 national random sample of the population and contribute with an
average of around 1 million observations each year to our total sample.
For our analysis, we aggregate the data to cells at the state-of-birth x
year-of-birth x age level as treatment in terms of early disease environment
occursatthestate-andyear-of-birthlevel. Thisaggregationresultsin25,400
cells. Table 1 reports the descriptive statistics for the entire sample and the
sub-samples divided into decades.
3 Approaches and empirical strategy
3.1 Epidemiological dynamic distribution model
In this section we develop a dynamic distribution model based on the SIR
framework that distributes all measles counts observed across states and
years across cohorts defined by birth year and state. The goal is to calculate
the ratio of infections to cohort size which represents the share of a cohort
that has ever been infected by measles.
If data were available on all measles infections including age information,
calculating cohorts’ share of ever infected individuals would be trivial. But,
astypicallythecaseforinfectiousdiseasedata,reportingofmeaslesinfections
in the analyzed time period was not complete and no information on the age
at infection is available. We therefore first need to estimate states’ reporting
rates to obtain estimates of the total number of infections in a given state
in a given year. Second, we need to know how many susceptible individuals,
who have not been infected with measles before, remain in each cohort in
eachyear. Ournotationfollowsadiscrete modelwithtimeunits representing
years and cohorts aging by one year each period.
9

3.1.1 Reporting rate estimation
In the pre-vaccination era we can roughly assume that everyone is infected
with measles eventually (Finkenst¨adt and Grenfell, 2000). This implies that
cumulativemeaslescasesapproximatelyequalcumulativebirths(Finkensta¨dt
andGrenfell,2000). Wefollowtheexistingliteratureandchoosetolinkbirths
to measles cases focussing on the pre-vaccination years 1950–1960. The slope
of the regression of cases on births then represents the reporting rate (see
Figure A1 for an illustration in the case of Oklahoma). Figure 3 shows the
distribution of the estimated reporting rate across states. A significant share
of states has reporting rates below 10% and the top state has a rate of 38%.
The average reporting rate across states is 13%. Overall, this shows that
reporting is fairly low and heterogeneous across states, emphasizing the im-
portance accounting for these differences. Appendix Figure A2 shows the
spatial distribution of reporting rates across the United States. Reporting
rates seem somewhat lower in the South (with the exception of Texas) than
in the North, in particular the North-East. But there is no strong spatial
pattern. We can modify the reporting rate (e.g. by taking doubling the rate
or cutting it in half) or the shape of the reporting rate (linear or changing
over time) without changing the main results in a qualitative way.
3.1.2 Distributing cases across cohorts
Next, we need to distribute the total number of cases (reported cases divided
by the reporting rate) across cohorts. We assume that every person can
only get infected once and that the risk of infection is independent of an
individual’s age conditional on prior infection status.7 Hence, infections in
a given state and year are distributed across cohorts based on each cohort’s
7Thisimpliesthatcasesareequallydistributedacrossallsusceptiblesinastateregard-
less of their age. However, more cases will be distributed to younger ages as the share of
susceptibles decreases with age. We can modify the assumption of age-independent infec-
tion risk, e.g. by assigning higher risks to younger individuals. The main results remain
qualitatively unchanged.
10

share of total susceptibles in the population:
S(t,a)
I(t,a) = I(t)∗ (1)
(cid:80)
S(t,a)
I (t)
reported
with I(t) = , (2)
reportingrate
where t and a refer to year and age, respectively, and the total infections I(t)
correspond to the ratio of reported cases divided by the estimated reporting
rate.
Unvaccinated cohorts become fully susceptible at age 1 when they lose
maternal immunization (Sato et al., 1979)8 while vaccination is modeled as
a reduction in the number of births (Keeling and Rohani, 2011):
S(t+1,a = 1) = births(t)×[1−vaccination(t+1)] if age=1. (3)
After age 1, the stock of susceptibles within a cohort follows the following
simple law of motion:
S(t+1,a+1) = S(t,a)−I(t,a) if age>1. (4)
Finally, our dynamic distribution model needs to start in some period,
and in this initial period we do not know the number of susceptibles re-
maining in cohorts that are older than 1, as infections in prior years are not
observed. Our initial time period (1935) lies in the pre-vaccination era and
we can approximate the share of susceptibles across age groups by average
8For a review on passive transmission of antibodies against measles in newborns see
Leuridan and Van Damme (2007). Interestingly, immunization duration differs for new-
borns from mothers who naturally acquired measles or mothers who acquired antibodies
vaccine-induced . While in our model we rely on passive immunization from mothers who
were naturally infected, women vaccinated with live attenuated measles vaccine generally
pass on shorter protection against measles to their children up to the age of 8 months
(Lennon and Black, 1986).
11

susceptibility curves (AS(a)) from pre-vaccination era studies, calibrated to
match an overall population susceptibility rate of 2.5 percent (Orenstein et
al.,1985).9 Hence, susceptiblesacrossageintheinitialperiodaredetermined
by:
S(t = 1,a) = pop(t = 1,a)∗AS(a) (5)
3.1.3 Calculating cohorts’ share ever infected
Having distributed all infections across cohorts, we then sum up infections
over time within each cohort and divide by cohort size. This then gives us
the share of individuals ever infected. We run the model at the state level
though we use U.S.-wide vaccination rates as there is no state-level data on
the vaccine rollout. For a graphical overview of states’ share ever infected
see Appendix Figure A3.
3.2 Economic “reduced-form” approach
A rich and prominent literature in economics has accumulated evidence that
the early life disease environment has strong and persistent impacts on the
population’s human capital accumulation. Studies from that literature have
in common that they typically identify the long-term effects of disease spread
by exploiting some type of health intervention or sudden society-wide health
improvement and interacting it with a measure of baseline disease exposure
(often mortality). These approaches typically are build on a version of the
following regression model
Y = α+γ(Tpre ×Pre )+θ +δ +(cid:15) , (6)
s,c c s s c s,c
9InthestudybyOrensteinetal.(1985), thedatacoversthepre-vaccineerafromthree
different locations and dates. Results are all basically identical, so that there is no reason
to suspect that that profile would look much different for any other location or time in
the pre-vaccine era.
12

where s refers to state (or region, or country), c is the birth cohort (or
simply time), Pre is a proxy of the disease exposure (e.g. mortality) during
s
the pre-intervention, Tpre is a dummy for the pre-intervention period, and
c
θ and δ are state and cohort fixed effects.
s c
Prominent economic studies using such an approach are, among others,
Acemoglu and Johnson (2007), Ager et al. (2018), Bhalotra and Venkatara-
mani(2015),Bleakley(2007),Bleakley(2010),Bu¨tikoferandSalvanes(2020),
Cutleretal.(2010), Egedesøetal.(2020), Jayachandranetal.(2010), Lazuka
(2020), and Lucas (2010).
For instance, Acemoglu and Johnson (2007) interact major international
healthimprovementsinthe 1940swith pre-1940mortalityrates from15lead-
ing infectious diseases to study life expectancy on economic performance.
Bleakley (2007), more specifically, combines pre-eradication distribution of
hookwormdiseasewiththehookworm-eradicationcampaigntoshowtheben-
eficial impact on education while Bleakley (2010), Cutler et al. (2010) and
Lucas (2010) obtain plausible exogenous variation in child health by relying
on malaria eradication in the US, India, or Paraguay and Sri Lanka to study
the impact on adult labor market outcomes, consumption, and educational
attainment.
In the same vein Ager et al. (2018) combine pre-vaccination variation
in smallpox mortality across Swedish counties with the introduction of the
smallpox vaccine, while Bu¨tikofer and Salvanes (2020) and Egedesø et al.
(2020) interact tuberculosis infection rates and mortality with tuberculosis
testing and vaccination in Norway and tuberculosis dispensaries in Danish
cities, respectively. Finally, Bhalotra and Venkataramani (2015), Jayachan-
dran et al. (2010), and Lazuka (2020) exploit the introduction of sulfa drugs,
a medical innovation that reduced exposure to pneumonia in infancy, inter-
acted with pre-innovation pneumonia mortality to examine the long-term
impacts on educational and labor market outcomes of affected cohorts.
In recent contemporaneous work, Atwood (2022) examines the long-run
13

effects of measles vaccination on earnings and employment interacting the
measles vaccine introduction with pre-vaccine levels of reported measles in-
cidence. The long-term effects reported in Atwood (2022) are qualitatively
and quantitatively very close to the effects we estimate despite our use of
pre-vaccine measles mortality rather than pre-vaccine measles incidence in
our baseline economic reduced-form approach. The similarity of our esti-
mates suggests that, in the case of measles, reported incidence rates are a
good proxy for disease severity and mortality.
Exceptions in terms of their empirical designs are provided by Driessen
et al. (2015) and Nandi et al. (2019), who study measles vaccination impacts
on child development in Bangladesh, Ethiopia, India, and Vietnam. Driessen
et al. (2015) exploit a slow, staggered roll-out of the measles vaccine across
different areas in Bangladesh allowing to study an area acting as a control
group while only being treated several years after. Nandi et al. (2019) exploit
quasi-experimental variation in vaccine coverage in low-income countries us-
ing longitudinal data that includes information on vaccination status. While
these designs are not feasible in most developed countries where vaccine
coverage is near universal and the initial roll-out has been fast, these stud-
ies provide important evidence of positive vaccination impacts on a broad
range of developmental outcomes, including child anthropometry, cognition,
schooling enrolment, and test scores.
In this paper, we base our reduced-form specification on the most com-
mon approach used in the literature exploiting local differences in measles
mortality prior to the introduction of the vaccine interacted with the vac-
cine roll-out. Specifically, we calculate state-level measles mortality for the
age groups 0–5 averaged across the years 1959–1963 and interact them with
the introduction of the measles vaccine in the United States. States individ-
ual pre-vaccine mortality rates are scaled so that the overall average for the
United States equals one.
14

3.3 Empirical strategy
Toexaminetherelationshipbetweentheearlychildhooddiseaseenvironment
and adult long-term outcomes, we estimate two types of linear regressions
for age group a in birth cohort c in state of birth s. Specifically, in case of
the epidemiological model the equation looks as follows:
Y = α+γShareEverInfected +β +δ +θ +(cid:15) , (7)
sca sc a c s sca
where ShareEverInfected is the share of each cohort ever infected with
sc
measlesderivedfromtheepidemiologicaldistributionmodel. Forthereduced-
form approach, we adjust Equation (7) to the following version:
Y = α+γ(Tpre ×Pre )+β +δ +θ +(cid:15) , (8)
sca c s a c s sca
where Pre corresponds to states’ measles mortality (ages 0–5, in 1959–1963)
s
and Tpre is a dummy equal to one for cohorts born in or prior to 1963, the
c
year of the measles vaccine introduction.
In both equations, Y stands for the different averaged individual long-
sca
term outcomes, such as high school completion, employment status, total
household income (in logarithmic terms), poverty status, receiving any wel-
fare transfers or food stamps as well as health outcomes such as a disability
status at work and a disability index comprised of impairments in 5 daily-life
dimensions. Furthermore, we control for age, birth cohort, and state of birth
fixed effects by β , δ , and θ , respectively. We also conduct an alternative
a c s
specification where we control for cohort polynomials instead of cohort fixed
effects. Our coefficient of interest is γ, representing the estimate of the effect
of measles exposure in early childhood. Standard errors are clustered at the
state of birth level (Bertrand et al., 2004) and observations are weighted by
cohort size.
15

Combining both approaches, we also estimate a Bartik-type regression:
Y = α+γ(Pre ×ShareEverInfected )+β +δ +θ +(cid:15) , (9)
sca s sc a c s sca
where Pre is now multiplied with the ShareEverInfected . All other
s sc
variables are defined as above.
Figure 4 shows the epidemiological “share-ever-infected” measure, the
reduced-form measure, and the combined Bartik measure for five selected
states and averaged across the United States. As it can be seen, the variation
intheepidemiologicalmeasureisdrivenentirelybythedifferenttiminginthe
reduction of infection shares. All states start with a share close to one and
end with a share close to zero, but some states experience reductions earlier
than others. The variation in the reduced-form measure, on the other hand,
is entirely driven by pre-existing level differences while the time variation is
uniform across all states. The Bartik measure combines the two types of
variations.
4 Results
4.1 Preditive power of epidemiological measure
Before turning to our main results, we first explore the predictive power of
our dynamic distribution model. Our distribution model is based on the
SIR framework that is centred around the key assumption that outbreaks
are driven by susceptibles who drop out of the susceptible pool once they
have been infected. A larger pool of susceptibles in one period therefore
increases the risk of an outbreak in the following period. An outbreak in a
given period, on the other hand, leads to a smaller pool of susceptibles in
the following period. In Table 2 we test these predictions using state-specific
annual susceptible counts generated from our dynamic distribution model.
The table shows coefficients from a regression of state-level measles counts
16

on lags and leads of susceptible counts while controlling for state and year
fixed effects. In line with the mechanics of the SIR model, lagged susceptible
counts strongly predict measles outbreaks (column 1) while these outbreaks
are strongly negatively related to susceptible counts in the subsequent period
(column 2). Note that our dynamic distribution model generates suscepti-
ble based on lagged measles outbreaks, hence the relationship in column (2)
is mechanical. However, the information about future outbreaks does not
feed into susceptible counts and therefore the result in column (1) shows the
predictive power of the model. Column (3) shows the predictive power of
the lagged susceptible measure when it is split into deciles. Columns (4–9)
test the predictive power within subperiods of our data. Remarkably, our
model is predictive of future outbreaks during the pre-vaccine era (columns
4–5), as well as during the period surrounding the introduction of the vac-
cination (columns 6–7) and during the post-vaccine era when measles were
largely eliminated and only idiosyncratic minor outbreaks occurred (columns
8–9). These results validate our model across three periods with very distinct
measles environments.
Appendix Table A1 compares the predictive power of the dynamic dis-
tribution model to the reduced-form measure. As shown in column (3), the
reduced form measure has no predictive power of future outbreaks and is
also not correlated with lagged outbreaks. Moreover, since the measure only
changes in the year of the measles introduction and the regressions include
state fixed effects, the measures’ impact cannot be estimated in the pre- and
the post-vaccine era (columns 6 and 10).
To sum up, our epidemiological distribution model generates a distribu-
tion of measles cases that is highly predictive of measles outbreaks while
the reduced-form measure is uncorrelated with year-to-year fluctuations in
measles cases.
17

4.2 Long-term effects on human capital and health
outcomes
Figures 5–7 compare the epidemiological approach with the reduced-form
approach as well as the combined Bartik approach in terms of the long-term
impacts on human capital outcomes. The figures show regression coefficients
based on Equations (7)–(9), both for versions with cohort quadratic trends
and cohort fixed effects. Corresponding numerical results are reported in
Tables 3–5.
The top left panel of Figure 5 plots the estimated effects of early life
measles exposure on high school completion. The darker colored bars show
the estimates resulting from regressions including quadratic cohort trends
and they indicate similar effects across all three approaches. The coefficient
for the epidemiological model is -0.539 with a standard error of 0.196 (Table
3, Panel A1, column 1), indicating that a cohort that has been fully exposed
to measles early in life (ever infected share equals one) has a 0.54 percentage
points lower high school completing rate than a cohort with zero exposure.
The point estimate from the reduced form specification (Table 3, Panel B1,
column 1), suggests that states with a pre-vaccination era measles mortality
around the U.S. average at that time experienced a significant increase in
high school completion of about 0.85 percentage points in response to the
introduction of the vaccine. The Bartik specification (Table 3, Panel C1,
column 1) which combines the two approaches results in a similar point
estimate, indicating that decreasing the share of individuals ever infected
with measles in a cohort from one to zero, in a state with the average pre-
vaccination measles rate, significantly increases high school completion by
1.05 percentage points. When we control for cohort fixed effects instead of
quadratictrends,theapproachesbasedonthereduced-formmeasureresultin
very similar estimates (Table 3, Panels B2 and C2, column 1). The estimate
from the epidemiological model (Table 3, Panel A2, column 1), however, flips
sign and looses in significance when cohort fixed effects are included.
18

Thepatternforhighschoolcompletionisobservedsimilarlyforloghouse-
hold income, poverty, welfare income receipt, and food stamp receipt. In the
specifications with cohort trends all approaches indicate positive impacts of
reducing measles exposure by improving these long-term outcomes. While
the reduced form approach is robust to the inclusion of cohort fixed effects,
the epidemiological modeling approach is, however, not. An exception is the
unemployment rate which is not consistently affected in the specifications
with cohort fixed effects.
Figure 6 and Table 4 show the same set of regression results for health
measures that are reported in the Census and ACS. Again the reduced-
form and the Bartik approach result in very similar point estimates that are
robust to the inclusion of cohort fixed effects, indicating negative long-term
health consequences of early life measles exposure. For example, the reduced
form specification with cohort fixed effects indicates that the measles vaccine
introduction reduced work disability, cognitive disability, self-care disability,
independent living difficulties, and vision or hearing difficulties by 0.8, 0.4,
0.3, 0.5, and 0.5 percentage points, respectively. Relative to the sample
mean of these outcomes, the effect sizes range between 8 and 12.8 percent.
The epidemiological modeling approach, on the other hand, is not robust to
the inclusion of different cohort effects. Surprisingly, the approach results
in significantly negative health impacts (i.e. a higher share of ever infected
individuals is associated with less disability and fewer health difficulties).
The negative long-run impacts of early life measles exposure on human
capital and health outcomes estimated via the reduced-form approach are in
line with the long-term disease impacts known from the economic literature
while it is more difficult to reconcile the estimates resulting from the epi-
demiological modeling approach, especially the reverse health impacts. At
the same time, the economic literature relies on similar reduced form ap-
proaches, so the comparability of results does not provide an independent
assessment. We therefore analyse two additional outcomes that are known
19

to be directly linked to measles infection rates: Measles mortality and overall
mortality in early childhood (ages 0–5). While measles mortality is obviously
linked to measles infections, the epidemiological literature has argued that
measles infections also increase the risk of childhood mortality from other
diseases (Mina et al., 2015).
Figure 7 (estimates reported in Table 5) shows that the reduced-form
approach indeed indicates a significantly positive impact of higher disease
exposure both on measles mortality and overall childhood mortality. The
epidemiological model approach, on the other hand does not result in a sig-
nificant effect for the cohort trends model while it indicates an implausible
mortality reduction in response to higher measles infection shares when co-
hort fixed effects are controlled for. Notice that the reduced-from measure
is based on pre-vaccination measles mortality and therefore more directly
linked to mortality changes. But there is no reasonable explanation why a
cohort’s share of individuals ever infected with measles should be negatively
associated with childhood mortality. The mortality results therefore support
the notion that the epidemiological modeling approach provides variation in
measles infections that are difficult to disentangle from other factors driving
cohort outcomes.
4.3 Alternative epidemiological modeling assumptions
Finally, onemightwondertowhichextenttheeffectpatternsobservedforthe
epidemiological approach depend on the assumptions built into the dynamic
distribution model. Appendix Figure A5 plots the estimated impacts of the
shareeverinfectedonhighschoolgraduationandloghouseholdincomeacross
12 models with varying alternative parameter specifications. In particular,
we vary the initial share of susceptibles in the population (S ), we relax
0
the assumption that infection rates among susceptibles are independent of
age (assuming higher infection rates below age 6), and we allow for different
functional forms when estimating the reporting function (default is the mean
20

reporting rate, and we show results allowing for a linear time trend, a local
polynomial trend (LOESS), and a spline function). As it can be seen in
Figure A5, estimates are very similar across the different models and the
inclusion of cohort fixed effects has a similar impact on the effect pattern.
These results suggest that the dynamic accounting model is not sensitive to
the core assumptions.
5 Discussion and conclusion
This paper uses an epidemiological modeling and an economic reduced-form
approach to measure the long-term impacts of early-life measles exposure
around the introduction of the measles vaccine in the United States. The
reduced-formapproachrevealslargeimprovementsineducational, labormar-
ket, and health outcomes in adulthood among cohorts born after the vaccine
introduction in states with historically high measles mortality. No consistent
effect patterns are detected using the epidemiological modeling approach
which exploits differences in cohorts’ share of individuals that were ever in-
fected with measles. These results suggest that differences in the severity of
measles infections, proxied by measles mortality, matter more for long-term
outcomes than the difference in mere infection rates itself.
The long-term impacts of early life measles exposure are in line with the
economic literature that has documented, among others, long-term conse-
quences of exposure to hookworm (Bleakley, 2010), malaria (Cutler et al.,
2010; Lucas, 2010), and tuberculosis (Bu¨tikofer and Salvanes, 2020; Egedesø
etal.,2020). Ourfindingthattheseverityofthediseaseenvironmentmatters
more than the measles infection rate itself is also in line with the notion that
measles infections are particularly harmful for children as they can eliminate
previously obtained immunity to other diseases (Gadroen et al., 2018; Mina
et al., 2015, 2019; Petrova et al., 2019). This mechanism should matter most
in a severe disease environment with high childhood mortality not only for
21

measles but also other childhood diseases.
Our estimated impacts are also very much in line with the contemporane-
ous analysis of Atwood (2022). We find that the introduction of the vaccine
lead to a 2.7 percent increase in log total family income, a reduction of the
poverty rate by 5.7 percent and a non-significant reduction of unemployment
of 0.1 percent, while Atwood (2022) reports a family income increase of 1.7
percent, a poverty reduction of 7.3 percent, and an increase of 0.3 percent
for employment. A key difference in our approach is that we use pre-vaccine
measles mortality as a proxy for disease burden while Atwood (2022) uses
pre-vaccine measles cases that are not adjusted for reporting rate differences.
The similarity of our reduced-form estimates suggests that, at least in the
context of the pre-vaccine United States, reporting rates can be used as a
proxy for mortality and disease burden (presumably as more severe cases of
measles were more likely to be reported). This insight further emphasizes
that the epidemiological distribution model, which fully adjusts for differ-
ences in reporting rates across locations, focuses on a very different margin.
Despite the discovery of an effective measles vaccine over half a century
ago and its world-wide dissemination, measles outbreaks have been rising
again over the past decade. The COVID-19 pandemic is expected to fur-
ther increase vaccination hesitancy and the risk of future measles outbreaks
(Roberts, 2020). Our analysis documents large life-long welfare gains among
cohorts that benefited from the introduction of the measles vaccine in the
United States emphasizing the importance of a continued vaccination effort
(Ba¨rnighausen et al., 2014a; Bloom et al., 2018). However, our comparison of
epidemiological and reduced-form approaches indicates that vaccination ben-
efits in terms of long-term human capital impacts are particularly large in en-
vironments with severe childhood disease burdens. Our results are therefore
particularly supportive of vaccination efforts in low-income countries with
high childhood mortality (Ba¨rnighausen et al., 2014b; Nandi et al., 2020).
22

References
Acemoglu, Daron and Simon Johnson, “Disease and development: The
effect of life expectancy on economic growth,” Journal of Political Econ-
omy, 2007, 115 (6), 925–985.
Ager, Philipp, Casper Worm Hansen, and Peter Sandholt Jensen,
“Fertility and early-life mortality: Evidence from smallpox vaccination in
Sweden,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2018, 16 (2),
487–521.
Atwood, Alicia, “The long-term effects of measles vaccination on earnings
and Employment,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2022,
14 (2), 34–60.
Bailey, Martha, Price Fishback, Michael Haines, Shawn Kantor,
Edson Severnini, and Anna Wentz, “US county-level natality and
mortalitydata,1915–2007,”2016. Inter-universityConsortiumforPolitical
and Social Research (ICPSR).
B¨arnighausen, Till, David E Bloom, Elizabeth T Cafiero-Fonseca,
and Jennifer Carroll O’Brien, “Valuing vaccination,” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 2014, 111 (34), 12313–12319.
, Seth Berkley, Zulfiqar A Bhutta, David M Bishai, Maureen M
Black, David E Bloom, Dagna Constenla, Julia Driessen, John
Edmunds, David Evans et al., “Reassessing the value of vaccines,” The
Lancet Global Health, 2014, 2 (5), e251–e252.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan,“How
much should we trust differences-in-differences estimates?,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (1), 249–275.
Bhalotra, Sonia R and Atheendar Venkataramani, “Shadows of the
captain of the men of death: Early life health interventions, human capital
investments, and institutions,” Human Capital Investments, and Institu-
tions (August 8, 2015), 2015.
Bleakley, Hoyt, “Diseaseanddevelopment: Evidencefromhookwormerad-
ication in the American South,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2007, 122 (1), 73–117.
23

, “Malaria eradication in the Americas: A retrospective analysis of child-
hood exposure,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2010,
2 (2), 1–45.
Bloom, David E, Daniel Cadarette, and Maddalena Ferranna, “The
societal value of vaccination in the age of COVID-19,” American Journal
of Public Health, 2021, 111 (6), 1049–1054.
, Victoria Y Fan, and JP Sevilla, “The broad socioeconomic benefits
of vaccination,” Science Translational Medicine, 2018, 10 (441), eaaj2345.
Bu¨tikofer, Aline and Kjell G Salvanes, “Disease control and inequal-
ity reduction: Evidence from a tuberculosis testing and vaccination cam-
paign,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2020, 87 (5), 2087–2125.
Cutler, David, Winnie Fung, Michael Kremer, Monica Singhal, and
Tom Vogl, “Early-life malaria exposure and adult outcomes: Evidence
from malaria eradication in India,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 2010, 2 (2), 72–94.
Driessen, J, A Razzaque, D Walker, and David Canning, “The
effect of childhood measles vaccination on school enrolment in Matlab,
Bangladesh,” Applied Economics, 2015, 47 (55), 6019–6040.
Egedesø, Peter Juul, Casper Worm Hansen, and Peter Sandholt
Jensen, “Preventing the white death: Tuberculosis dispensaries,” The
Economic Journal, 2020, 130 (629), 1288–1316.
Finkenst¨adt, B¨arbel F and Bryan T Grenfell, “Timeseriesmodellingof
childhood diseases: A dynamical systems approach,” Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series C (Applied Statistics), 2000, 49 (2), 187–205.
Gadroen, Kartini, Caitlin N Dodd, Gwen MC Masclee,
Maria AJ De Ridder, Daniel Weibel, Michael J Mina, Bryan T
Grenfell, Miriam CJM Sturkenboom, David AMC Van De Vi-
jver, and Rik L De Swart, “Impact and longevity of measles-associated
immune suppression: A matched cohort study using data from the THIN
general practice database in the UK,” BMJ Open, 2018, 8 (11), e021465.
24

Guerra, Fiona M, Shelly Bolotin, Gillian Lim, Jane Heffernan,
Shelley L Deeks, Ye Li, and Natasha S Crowcroft, “The basic re-
production number (R0) of measles: A systematic review,” The Lancet
Infectious Diseases, 2017, 17 (12), e420–e428.
Jayachandran, Seema, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Kimberly V
Smith, “Modern medicine and the twentieth century decline in mortal-
ity: Evidence on the impact of sulfa drugs,” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 2010, 2 (2), 118–46.
Keeling, Matt J and Pejman Rohani, “Modeling infectious diseases in
humans and animals,” in “Modeling infectious diseases in humans and
animals,” Princeton university press, 2011.
Lazuka, Volha, “Infant health and later-life labor market outcomes: Ev-
idence from the introduction of sulfa antibiotics in Sweden,” Journal of
Human Resources, 2020, 55 (2), 660–698.
Lennon, Jeffrey L and Francis L Black, “Maternally derived measles
immunity in era of vaccine-protected mothers,” The Journal of Pediatrics,
1986, 108 (5), 671–676.
Leuridan, E and P Van Damme, “Passivetransmissionandpersistenceof
naturally acquired or vaccine-induced maternal antibodies against measles
in newborns,” Vaccine, 2007, 25 (34), 6296–6304.
Lucas, Adrienne M, “Malaria eradication and educational attainment:
Evidence from Paraguay and Sri Lanka,” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 2010, 2 (2), 46–71.
Mina, Michael J, Tomasz Kula, Yumei Leng, Mamie Li, Rory D De
Vries, Mikael Knip, Heli Siljander, Marian Rewers, David F
Choy, Mark S Wilson et al., “Measles virus infection diminishes pre-
existing antibodies that offer protection from other pathogens,” Science,
2019, 366 (6465), 599–606.
Mina, Michale J., C. Jessica E. Metcalf, Rik L. de Swart, A.D.M.E.
Osterhaus, and Bryan T. Grenfell, “Long-term measles-induced im-
munomodulation increases overall childhood infectious disease mortality,”
Science, 2015, 348 (6235), 694–699.
25

Murray, Eleanor J, “Epidemiology’s time of need: COVID-19 calls for
epidemic-related economics,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2020, 34
(4), 105–20.
Nandi, Arindam, Anita Shet, Jere R Behrman, Maureen M Black,
David E Bloom, and Ramanan Laxminarayan, “Anthropometric,
cognitive, and schooling benefits of measles vaccination: Longitudinal co-
hort analysis in Ethiopia, India, and Vietnam,” Vaccine, 2019, 37 (31),
4336–4343.
, Santosh Kumar, Anita Shet, David E Bloom, and Ramanan
Laxminarayan, “Childhoodvaccinationsandadultschoolingattainment:
Long-term evidence from India’s Universal Immunization Programme,”
Social Science & Medicine, 2020, 250, 112885.
National Center for Health Statistics, “Vital statistics of the United
States. Vol II. Mortality. Part A. Hyattsville, Maryland: US Department
of Health and Human Services,” Public Health Serivce 1959-1978.
Orenstein, Walter A, Alan R Hinman, and Mark J Papania, “Evo-
lution of measles elimination strategies in the United States,” The Journal
of Infectious Diseases, 2004, 189 (Supplement 1), S17–S22.
and , “The immunization system in the United States—the role of
school immunization laws,” Vaccine, 1999, 17, S19–S24.
, Roger H Bernier, Timothy J Dondero, Alan R Hinman, James S
Marks, Kenneth J Bart, and Barry Sirotkin, “Field evaluation of
vaccine efficacy,” Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 1985, 63 (6),
1055.
Panhuis, W. G. Van, J. Grefenstette, S. Y. Jung, N.S. Chock,
A. Cross, H. Eng, B.Y. Lee, V. Zadorozhny, S. Brown, D. Cum-
mings, and Burke D.S., “Contagious diseases in the United States from
1888 to the present,” The New England Journal of Medicine, November
2013, 369 (22), 2152–2158.
Petrova, Velislava N, Bevan Sawatsky, Alvin X Han, Brigitta M
Laksono, Lisa Walz, Edyth Parker, Kathrin Pieper, Carl A An-
derson, Rory D de Vries, Antonio Lanzavecchia et al., “Incomplete
26

genetic reconstitution of B cell pools contributes to prolonged immunosup-
pression after measles,” Science Immunology, 2019, 4 (41), eaay6125.
Roberts, Leslie, “Why measles deaths are surging–and coronavirus could
make it worse.,” Nature, 2020, 580 (7804), 446–448.
Ruggles, S., K. Genadek, R. Goeken, J. Grover, and M. Sobek,
“Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 6.0 [Machine-readable
database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota,” 2015.
Sato, Hiroshi, Paul Albrecht, David W Reynolds, Sergio Stagno,
and Francis A Ennis, “Transfer of measles, mumps, and rubella anti-
bodies from mother to infant: Its effect on measles, mumps, and rubella
immunization,” American Journal of Diseases of Children, 1979, 133 (12),
1240–1243.
27

Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Overall US measles incidence rate
etar
ecnedicni
ylkeew
04
03
02
01
0
1930w11940w11950w11960w11970w11980w11990w12000w1
time
Notes: Overall US measles incidence rate per 100,000 based on weekly reports from 1928
to 2003 in all US states (weighted with interpolated population per state in 1963 to get
the overall incidence rate, where population data per state were obtained from the US
CensusBureau). Theverticaldashedlineindicatestheyearofintroductionofthemeasles
vaccine in 1963.
28

3791–3591
:etats
yb
etar
ecnedicni
selsaeM
:2
erugiF
EM
HN
TV
IW
04 0
AM
YN
IM
LI
NM
DN
TM
DI
AW
04 0
IR
TC
JN
AP
HO
NI
AI
DS
YW
VN
RO
04 0
3691
ED
DM
AV
VW
YK
OM
EN
OC
TU
AC
04 0
3691
CD
CS
CN
NT
RA
SK
MN
ZA
04 0
3691
AG
LA
SM
AL
KO
04 0
3691
3691
3691
3691
LF
XT
KA
IH
04 0
3691
3691
3691
3691
raey
htrib
etar noitcefni ylraey
enil
dehsad
lacitrev
ehT
.setats
SU
lla
rof
3791
ot
3591
fo
doirep
eht
ni
000,001
rep
selsaem
fo
etar
ecnedicnI
:setoN
.3691
ni
eniccav
selsaem
eht
fo
noitcudortni
fo
raey
eht
setacidni
29

Figure 3: Distribution of state-level reporting rates
8
6
4
2
0
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
reporting rate
tnuoc
Notes: This figure shows the distribution of reporting rates across U.S. states estimated
using the epidemiological approach described in Section 3.1.
30

Figure 4: Share ever infected and pre-vaccine variation in measles mortality
1
FWLA
NY
.8
US
.6
CA
.4
.2 AR
0
detcefni
reve
erahS
Epidemiological measure: Share ever infected
1950 1960 1970 1980
year of birth
2
AR
1.5
1 FULS
CA
.5 NY
WA
0
naem
ot
delacs(
erusaem
FR
)doirep
eniccav-erp
ni
eno
Reduced-form measure: Pre-vacccine measles mortality x Pre-dummy
1950 1960 1970 1980
year of birth
2
AR
1.5
1 FULS
CA
.5 NY
WA
0
ytilatrom
eniccav-erP
detcefni
reve
erahS
x
Bartik: Pre-vaccine measles mortality x Share ever infected
1950 1960 1970 1980
year of birth
Notes: ThisfiguredepictsthethreedifferentmeasuresusedintheanalysisfortheUS(blue
line) and 5 sample states (Arkansas, California, Florida, New York, and Washington).
Measures are scaled so that the overall US measure moves from 1 to 0 from 1950 to
1980. Panel A shows the share infected derived from the epidemiological (Epi.) model.
Panel B shows the interaction of the states’ measles mortality (ages 0—5, in 1959—1963)
with a dummy equal to one for cohorts born prior (<=) 1963 (year of measles vaccine
introduction), the reduced-form (RF) measure. Panel C shows a combination of both
approaches — replacing the dummy in the3R1F measure with the share infected from the
Epi. model — the Epi.-RF Bartik measure.

Figure 5: Effects of early life measles exposure on labor market and welfare
outcomes
00.2
00.0
00.2-
00.1
00.0
00.1-
04.002.000.002.0-
05.0
00.0
05.0-
50.0
00.0
50.0-
00.2
00.1
00.0
00.1-
High school completion Unemployed Log HH income
Poverty Any welfare income Any food stamps
Epi. model cohort trends cohort FEs
RF model cohort trends cohort FEs
Epi.-RF Bartik cohort trends cohort FEs
Notes: This figure shows point estimates including 95%-confidence intervals for the de-
pendent variable as indicated in each subfigure from linear regressions in the full sample
aggregated to cells at the state-of-birth x year-of-birth x age level and weighted by the
cell’s population. Explanatory variables are the share infected derived from the epidemi-
ological (Epi.) model shown in red, the interaction of the states’ measles mortality (ages
0—5, in 1959—1963) with a dummy equal to one for cohorts born prior (<=) 1963 (year
of measles vaccine introduction) for the reduced-form (RF) model shown in violet, and a
combination of both approaches for the Epi.-RF Bartik regression shown in green. Re-
gressionseitherincludecohorttrends—linearandquadraticterms—asindicatedinrich
colorsorcohortfixedeffectsasindicatedinpalecolors. Allestimationsfurthercontrolfor
state and age fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
32

Figure 6: Effects of early life measles exposure on health outcomes
0.2
0.0
0.2-
5.0
0.0
5.0-
0.1
0.0
0.1-
0.1
0.0
0.1-
0.1
0.0
0.1-
0.1
0.0
0.1-
Work disability Disability Index cognitive difficulty
Self-care difficulty Indep. living difficulty Vision/hearing diff.
Epi. model cohort trends cohort FEs
RF model cohort trends cohort FEs
Epi.-RF Bartik cohort trends cohort FEs
Notes: This figure shows point estimates including 95%-confidence intervals for the de-
pendent variable as indicated in each subfigure from linear regressions in the full sample
aggregated to cells at the state-of-birth x year-of-birth x age level and weighted by the
cell’s population. Explanatory variables are the share infected derived from the epidemi-
ological (Epi.) model shown in red, the interaction of the states’ measles mortality (ages
0—5, in 1959—1963) with a dummy equal to one for cohorts born prior (<=) 1963 (year
of measles vaccine introduction) for the reduced-form (RF) model shown in violet, and a
combination of both approaches for the Epi.-RF Bartik regression shown in green. Re-
gressionseitherincludecohorttrends—linearandquadraticterms—asindicatedinrich
colorsorcohortfixedeffectsasindicatedinpalecolors. Allestimationsfurthercontrolfor
state and age fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
33

Figure 7: Effect of early life measles exposure on medium-run mortality (ages
0–5)
01.0
00.0
01.0-
00.5
00.0
00.5-
Measles mortality Overall death rate
Epi. model cohort trends cohort FEs
RF model cohort trends cohort FEs
Epi.-RF Bartik cohort trends cohort FEs
Notes: This figure shows point estimates including 95%-confidence intervals for the de-
pendent variable as indicated in each subfigure from linear regressions in the full sample
aggregated to cells at the state-of-birth x year-of-birth x age level and weighted by the
cell’s population. Explanatory variables are the share infected derived from the epidemi-
ological (Epi.) model shown in red, the interaction of the states’ measles mortality (ages
0—5, in 1959—1963) with a dummy equal to one for cohorts born prior (<=) 1963 (year
of measles vaccine introduction) for the reduced-form (RF) model shown in violet, and a
combination of both approaches for the Epi.-RF Bartik regression shown in green. Re-
gressionseitherincludecohorttrends—linearandquadraticterms—asindicatedinrich
colorsorcohortfixedeffectsasindicatedinpalecolors. Allestimationsfurthercontrolfor
state and age fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
34

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
(1) (2) (3) (4)
1950–1960 1961–1970 1971–1980 Total
Mean/SD Mean/SD Mean/SD Mean/SD
Epi. measure (share infected) 0.925 0.328 0.021 0.441
(0.158) (0.308) (0.027) (0.429)
RF measure 1.133 0.340 0.000 0.512
(0.593) (0.613) (0.000) (0.690)
Epi.-RF Bartik measure 1.046 0.358 0.021 0.493
(0.590) (0.420) (0.027) (0.606)
High school completion 92.362 92.613 93.012 92.653
(4.093) (3.444) (3.486) (3.710)
Unemployed 3.286 4.188 5.242 4.208
(1.810) (2.030) (2.630) (2.317)
Log HH income 10.986 11.029 10.839 10.952
(0.171) (0.158) (0.318) (0.240)
Poverty 8.062 8.462 11.205 9.205
(3.340) (3.361) (5.861) (4.540)
Any welfare income 1.231 1.643 2.020 1.618
(0.850) (1.033) (1.301) (1.119)
Any food stamps 8.363 10.074 12.518 10.255
(4.201) (4.356) (5.021) (4.842)
Work disability 10.308 6.633 4.577 7.274
(3.718) (2.897) (2.491) (3.919)
Disability Index 6.641 4.388 2.814 4.680
(2.304) (1.817) (1.208) (2.436)
Cognitive difficulty 5.943 5.031 4.139 5.067
(2.143) (2.075) (1.826) (2.155)
Self-care difficulty 3.525 2.205 1.258 2.368
(1.678) (1.379) (0.991) (1.676)
Indep. living difficulty 5.802 4.116 2.863 4.310
(2.401) (2.024) (1.593) (2.380)
Vision/hearing difficulty 6.149 3.803 2.337 4.163
(3.156) (2.192) (1.483) (2.883)
Number of cohorts
(year of birth x state of birth) 451 410 410 1,271
Notes: Columns (1) – (3) show descriptive statistics for the sub-samples born from 1950–
1960, 1961–1970, 1971–1980, respectively and column (4) shows the descriptive statistics
for the overall population. The overall population includes individuals born in the years
1950–1980intheUSandsampledintheCensus2000ortheAmericanCommunitySurveys
2001–2019. Thedataisaggregatedtocellsatthestate-of-birthxyear-of-birthxagelevel.
Thevariableonhavingaworkdisabilityisonlyavailableuptotheyear2007. Information
on receiving food stamps, instead, is only available starting from 2005.
35

ledoM
noitubirtsiD
cimanyD
eht
fo
rewoP
noitciderP
:2
elbaT
0891-1791
0791-1691
0691-0591
0891-0591
elbairavtnednepeD
)9(
)8(
)7(
)6(
)5(
)4(
)3(
)2(
)1(
atipacrepsesacselsaeM
**141.0
***822.0
***782.0
**040.0
)1-t(selbitpecsuS
)660.0(
)120.0(
)080.0(
)610.0(
***840.0-
)1+t(selbitpecsuS
)110.0(
000.0-
**800.0
300.0
2=gal
sfoselitnauq01
)100.0(
)300.0(
)200.0(
000.0
300.0
**010.0
200.0
3=gal
sfoselitnauq01
).(
)300.0(
)500.0(
)200.0(
***300.0
400.0
**810.0
300.0
4=gal
sfoselitnauq01
)100.0(
)300.0(
)700.0(
)300.0(
***400.0
**600.0
**710.0
200.0
5=gal
sfoselitnauq01
)100.0(
)300.0(
)700.0(
)300.0(
***500.0
***110.0
***320.0
400.0
6=gal
sfoselitnauq01
)100.0(
)300.0(
)700.0(
)300.0(
***500.0
***510.0
***230.0
*500.0
7=gal
sfoselitnauq01
)200.0(
)300.0(
)600.0(
)300.0(
***600.0
***020.0
***930.0
**700.0
8=gal
sfoselitnauq01
)200.0(
)400.0(
)800.0(
)300.0(
***700.0
***220.0
***610.0
500.0
9=gal
sfoselitnauq01
)200.0(
)400.0(
)500.0(
)400.0(
***800.0
***430.0
***130.0
**800.0
01=gal
sfoselitnauq01
)300.0(
)400.0(
)600.0(
)400.0(
133.0
093.0
826.0
556.0
132.0
522.0
865.0
155.0
665.0
2R
014
014
014
014
014
014
032,1
032,1
032,1
snoitavresbO
morf
detareneg
stnuoc
elbitpecsus
launna
cfiiceps-etats
fo
sdael
dna
sgal
gnisu
snoitciderp
kaerbtuo
selsaem
stset
elbat
sihT
:setoN
eht
ni
dna
)3—1
snmuloc(
0891–0591
morf
atipac
rep
sesac
selsaem
eht
era
elbairav
tnedneped
ehT
.ledom
noitubirtsid
cimanyd
eht
eht
morf
devired
sa
)1+t(
dna
)1-t(
sraey
eht
ni
selbitpecsus
eht
era
selbairav
yrotanalpxE
.wor
pot
eht
ni
detacidni
sa
sdoirepbus
.stceffedexfietatsdnatrohocroflortnocsnoissergerllA
.)1-t(sraeyehtniselbitpecsusehtfoseliceddna,ledom
).ipE(lacigoloimedipe
.level-%01/%5/%1ehttaecnacfiingislacitsitatsetacidni*/**/***
.leveletatsehttaderetsulcerasrorredradnatS
36

Table 3: Effects of early life measles exposure on labor market and welfare
outcomes
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Dependent variable: High Un- ln total Poverty Any family Food
school employed family income welfare inc. stamps
Panel A1: Epi. model and cohort trends
Share infected -0.539∗∗∗ 0.316∗∗∗ -0.037∗∗∗ 0.970∗∗∗ 0.050 1.160∗∗∗
(0.196) (0.072) (0.008) (0.136) (0.046) (0.154)
R2 0.722 0.396 0.905 0.747 0.325 0.682
Panel A2: Epi. model and cohort fixed effects
Share infected 0.795∗ 0.019 0.043∗∗∗ -0.275 -0.200∗∗ 0.012
(0.410) (0.101) (0.011) (0.164) (0.088) (0.220)
R2 0.730 0.398 0.909 0.751 0.328 0.686
Panel B1: RF model and cohort trends
Pre measles mort -0.846∗∗∗ 0.105∗ -0.030∗∗∗ 0.576∗∗∗ 0.157∗∗∗ 0.525∗∗∗
x Pre (0.187) (0.053) (0.007) (0.106) (0.035) (0.094)
R2 0.729 0.395 0.907 0.748 0.328 0.682
Panel B2: RF model and cohort fixed effects
Pre measles mort -1.079∗∗∗ 0.005 -0.027∗∗ 0.503∗∗ 0.234∗∗∗ 0.329∗∗
x Pre (0.374) (0.112) (0.013) (0.207) (0.082) (0.162)
R2 0.736 0.398 0.909 0.752 0.331 0.686
Panel C1: Epi.-RF Bartik and cohort trends
Pre measles mort -1.051∗∗∗ 0.130 -0.035∗∗∗ 0.774∗∗∗ 0.211∗∗∗ 0.702∗∗∗
x Share infected (0.295) (0.090) (0.011) (0.171) (0.061) (0.158)
R2 0.728 0.395 0.906 0.748 0.328 0.682
Panel C2: Epi.-RF Bartik and cohort fixed effects
Pre measles mort -0.922∗∗ 0.022 -0.019 0.469∗∗ 0.204∗∗ 0.351∗∗
x Share infected (0.360) (0.115) (0.013) (0.217) (0.077) (0.170)
R2 0.734 0.398 0.906 0.751 0.330 0.686
Observations 25,420 25,420 25,420 25,420 25,420 24,149
Mean dep. var 93.03 4.359 10.99 8.805 1.621 9.771
Notes: Linear regressions in the full sample aggregated to cells at the state-of-birth x year-of-birth
xagelevelandweightedbythecell’spopulation. Dependentvariablesareindicatedinthetoprow.
Explanatoryvariablesaretheshareinfectedderivedfromtheepidemiological(Epi.) modelinPanel
A, the interaction of the states’ measles mortality (ages 0—5, in 1959—1963) with a dummy equal
tooneforcohortsbornprior(<=)1963(yearofmeaslesvaccineintroduction)forthereduced-form
(RF) model in Panel B, and a combination of both approaches for the Epi.-RF Bartik regression
in Panel C. Regressions in subpanels 1 include cohort trends (linear and quadratic terms) and in
subpanels2controlforcohortfixedeffects. Allpanelsfurthercontrolforstateandagefixedeffects.
37
Standard errors are clustered at the state level. ***/**/* indicate statistical significance at the
1%/5%/10%-level.

Table 4: Effects of early life measles exposure on health outcomes
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Dependent variable: Work Disability Cognitive Self-care Indep. Vision
disability Index difficulty difficulty living diff. /hearing diff.
Panel A1: Epi. model and cohort trends
Share infected 0.091 0.014 0.196∗∗ 0.017 0.075 -0.302∗∗∗
(0.186) (0.083) (0.078) (0.056) (0.084) (0.080)
R2 0.635 0.843 0.535 0.669 0.667 0.807
Panel A2: Epi. model and cohort fixed effects
Share infected -0.928∗∗∗ -0.499∗∗∗ -0.444∗∗∗ -0.231∗ -0.409∗∗ -0.539∗∗∗
(0.274) (0.179) (0.136) (0.115) (0.170) (0.153)
R2 0.639 0.845 0.539 0.670 0.668 0.809
Panel B1: RF model and cohort trends
Pre measles mort 0.648∗∗∗ 0.338∗∗∗ 0.325∗∗∗ 0.188∗∗ 0.317∗∗∗ 0.187∗
x Pre (0.219) (0.115) (0.087) (0.072) (0.101) (0.102)
R2 0.638 0.846 0.539 0.671 0.669 0.808
Panel B2: RF model and cohort fixed effects
Pre measles mort 0.825∗∗ 0.573∗∗ 0.416∗∗ 0.318∗∗ 0.509∗∗ 0.482∗∗
x Pre (0.347) (0.223) (0.172) (0.142) (0.202) (0.182)
R2 0.641 0.848 0.541 0.672 0.671 0.811
Panel C1: Epi.-RF Bartik and cohort trends
Pre measles mort 0.753∗∗ 0.440∗∗ 0.386∗∗ 0.238∗ 0.405∗∗ 0.265
x Share infected (0.341) (0.195) (0.144) (0.124) (0.170) (0.175)
R2 0.637 0.846 0.538 0.670 0.669 0.808
Panel C2: Epi.-RF Bartik and cohort fixed effects
Pre measles mort 0.624 0.450∗ 0.308∗ 0.246 0.395∗ 0.371∗
x Share infected (0.372) (0.239) (0.180) (0.152) (0.209) (0.209)
R2 0.639 0.846 0.538 0.671 0.670 0.810
Observations 10,168 25,420 25,420 25,420 25,420 25,420
Mean dep. var 7.301 4.635 4.973 2.403 4.338 3.992
Notes: Linear regressions in the full sample aggregated to cells at the state-of-birth x year-of-birth
xagelevelandweightedbythecell’spopulation. Dependentvariablesareindicatedinthetoprow.
Explanatoryvariablesaretheshareinfectedderivedfromtheepidemiological(Epi.) modelinPanel
A, the interaction of the states’ measles mortality (ages 0—5, in 1959—1963) with a dummy equal
tooneforcohortsbornprior(<=)1963(yearofmeaslesvaccineintroduction)forthereduced-form
(RF) model in Panel B, and a combination of both approaches for the Epi.-RF Bartik regression
in Panel C. Regressions in subpanels 1 include cohort trends (linear and quadratic terms) and in
subpanels2controlforcohortfixedeffects. Allpanelsfurthercontrolforstateandagefixedeffects.
Standard errors are clustered at the state level. ***/**/* indicate statistical significance at the
38
1%/5%/10%-level.

Table 5: Effects of early life measles exposure on medium-term mortality
(ages 0–5)
(1) (2)
Dependent variable: Measles mortality Overall death rate
Panel A1: Epi. model and cohort trends
Share infected -0.007 -1.911∗
(0.013) (1.007)
R2 0.589 0.889
Panel A2: Epi. model and cohort fixed effects
Share infected -0.038∗∗ -3.036∗∗
(0.017) (1.384)
R2 0.626 0.901
Panel B1: RF model and cohort trends
Pre measles mort 0.028∗∗∗ 0.889∗
x Pre (0.010) (0.472)
R2 0.627 0.890
Panel B2: RF model and cohort fixed effects
Pre measles mort 0.038∗∗∗ 2.124∗∗∗
x Pre (0.014) (0.624)
R2 0.656 0.906
Panel C1: Epi.-RF Bartik and cohort trends
Pre measles mort 0.039∗ 1.418
x Share infected (0.020) (0.909)
R2 0.615 0.889
Panel C2: Epi.-RF Bartik and cohort fixed effects
Pre measles mort 0.032 1.321
x Share infected (0.022) (0.976)
R2 0.635 0.900
Observations 615 615
Mean dep. var .03499 26.81
Notes: Linear regressions in the sample including birth cohorts 1959–1973 aggregated to
cells at the state-of-birth x year-of-birth level and weighted by the cell’s birth counts.
Dependent variables are indicated in the top row. Explanatory variables are the share
infected derived from the epidemiological (Epi.) model in Panel A, the interaction of the
states’measlesmortality(ages0—5,in1959—1963)withadummyequaltooneforcohorts
born prior (<=) 1963 (year of measles vaccine introduction) for the reduced-form (RF)
modelinPanelB,andacombinationofbothapproachesfortheEpi.-RFBartikregression
in Panel C. Regressions in subpanels 1 include cohort trends (linear and quadratic terms)
and in subpanels 2 control for cohort fixed effects. All panels further control for state
39
and age fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. ***/**/* indicate
statistical significance at the 1%/5%/10%-level.

Appendix
Figure A1: Cumulative cases vs cumulative births, Oklahoma 1950–1960
40000
30000
20000
10000
0
1e+05 2e+05 3e+05 4e+05 5e+05
cumulative births
sesac
evitalumuc
OKLAHOMA
year
1960.0
1957.5
1955.0
1952.5
1950.0
Notes: This figure shows the relationship of cumulative measles cases versus cumulative
births in the years 1950–1960 for Oklahoma. The inferred reporting rate for Oklahoma is
derived based on the slope of this relationship.
1

setar
gnitroper
level-etats
weivrevO
:2A
erugiF
EM
HN
TV
IW
4.0 0.0
AM
YN
IM
LI
NM
DN
TM
DI
AW
4.0 0.0
IR
TC
JN
AP
HO
NI
AI
DS
YW
VN
RO
4.0 0.0
3691
ED
DM
AV
VW
YK
OM
EN
OC
TU
AC
4.0 0.0
3691
CD
CS
CN
NT
RA
SK
MN
ZA
4.0 0.0
3691
AG
LA
SM
AL
KO
4.0 0.0
3691
3691
3691
3691
LF
XT
KA
IH
4.0 0.0
3691
3691
3691
3691
raey
etar gnitroper
selsaem
evitalumuc
fo
pihsnoitaler
eht
fo
epols
eht
gnisu
setats
SU
lla
rof
setar
gnitroper
laudividni
swohs
erugfi
sihT
:setoN
.0691–0591
sraey
eht
ni
shtrib
evitalumuc
susrev
sesac
2

.S.U
eritne
ssorca
detcefni
reve
erahS
:3A
erugiF
EM
HN
TV
IW
1 0
AM
YN
IM
LI
NM
DN
TM
DI
AW
1 0
IR
TC
JN
AP
HO
NI
AI
DS
YW
VN
RO
1 0
3691
ED
DM
AV
VW
YK
OM
EN
OC
TU
AC
1 0
3691
CD
CS
CN
NT
RA
SK
MN
ZA
1 0
3691
AG
LA
SM
AL
KO
1 0
3691
3691
3691
3691
LF
XT
KA
IH
1 0
3691
3691
3691
3691
raey
htrib
trohoc htrib yb detcefni porp latot
.1.3
noitceS
ni
debircsed
hcaorppa
lacigoloimedipe
eht
gnisu
setats
SU
lla
rof
detcefni
reve
erahs
eht
swohs
erugfi
sihT
:setoN
3

Figure A4: Dynamic distribution model - sensitivity
Notes: This figure shows the share ever infected for two sample states, New York and
Texas, using the epidemiological approach described in Section 3.1 while varying input
parameters such as the initial susceptibility share (0.025 vs. 0.05) and different functional
forms to estimate the reporting rate.
4

Figure A5: Sensitivity of epidemiological model
High school completion High school completion
Cohort trends Cohort fixed effects
Model 1 Model 1
share infected -0.5389 share infected 0.7954
Model 2 Model 2
share infected -0.9363 share infected 0.6237
Model 3 Model 3
share infected share infected
-0.6695 0.9188
Model 4 Model 4
share infected share infected
Model 5 -0.5339 Model 5 0.7872
share infected share infected
Model 6 -0.9333 Model 6 0.6184
share infected share infected
Model 7 -0.6649 Model 7 0.9111
share infected share infected
Model 8 -0.4580 Model 8 0.9475
share infected share infected
Model 9 -0.8833 Model 9 0.7488
share infected share infected
Model 10 -0.5970 Model 10 1.0614
share infected share infected
Model 11 -0.4548 Model 11 0.9371
share infected share infected
Model 12 -0.8803 Model 12 0.7446
share infected share infected
-1.500 -1.000 -0.59-309.500 0.000 0.000 1.10.005022 2.000
Log HH income Log HH income
Cohort trends Cohort fixed effects
Model 1 Model 1
share infected -0.0371 share infected 0.0427
Model 2 Model 2
share infected -0.0489 share infected 0.0489
Model 3 Model 3
share infected share infected
-0.0423 0.0486
Model 4 Model 4
share infected share infected
Model 5 -0.0368 Model 5 0.0423
share infected share infected
Model 6 -0.0488 Model 6 0.0484
share infected share infected
Model 7 -0.0421 Model 7 0.0481
share infected share infected
Model 8 -0.0351 Model 8 0.0453
share infected share infected
Model 9 -0.0472 Model 9 0.0512
share infected share infected
Model 10 -0.0405 Model 10 0.0506
share infected share infected
Model 11 -0.0349 Model 11 0.0449
share infected share infected
Model 12 -0.0470 Model 12 0.0508
share infected share infected
-0.060 --00.0.040430 -0.020 0.020 0.040 0.0501 0.060 0.080
1 S0 = 0.025; IR =1;reportingfunction=linear
age
2 S0 = 0.025; IR =1;reportingfunction=loess
age
3 S0 = 0.025; IR =1;reportingfunction=spline
age
4 S0 = 0.025; IR =2;reportingfunction=linear
age
5 S0 = 0.025; IR =2;reportingfunction=loess
age
6 S0 = 0.025; IR =2;reportingfunction=spline
age
7 S0 = 0.05; IR =1;reportingfunction=linear
age
8 S0 = 0.05; IR =1;reportingfunction=loess
age
9 S0 = 0.05; IR =1;reportingfunction=spline
age
10 S0 = 0.05; IR =2;reportingfunction=linear
age
11 S0 = 0.05; IR =2;reportingfunction=loess
age
12 S0 = 0.05; IR =2;reportingfunction=spline
age
Notes: Shownaretheeffectsoftheshareeverinfectedonhighschoolgraduationratesand
log household income estimated using regression equation (7). The share ever infected is
calculatedviathedynamicdistributionmodelbasedon12versionsofdifferentalternative
parameter estimates. These versions are permutations of changes in the initial suscepti-
bilityshare(0.025vs. 0.05), changesintheratioofinfectionriskforthepopulationbelow
and above age 6 (infection ratio 1 vs. 2), and different functional forms to estimate the
reporting rate.
5

erusaeM
mroF-decudeR
.sv
ledoM
noitubirtsiD
cimanyD
rewoP
evitciderP
:1A
elbaT
0891-1791
0791-1691
0691-0591
0891-0591
elbairav
tnednepeD
)01(
)9(
)8(
)7(
)6(
)5(
)4(
)3(
)2(
)1(
atipac
rep
sesac
selsaeM
**141.0
***822.0
***782.0
**040.0
)1-t(
selbitpecsuS
)660.0(
)120.0(
)080.0(
)610.0(
***840.0-
)1+t(
selbitpecsuS
)110.0(
000.0
100.0
000.0
100.0
)1-t(
erusaem
FR
).(
)200.0(
).(
)100.0(
100.0
)1+t(
erusaem
FR
)100.0(
613.0
093.0
145.0
556.0
251.0
522.0
545.0
165.0
155.0
665.0
2R
014
014
014
014
014
014
032,1
032,1
032,1
032,1
snoitavresbO
stnuoc
elbitpecsus
launna
cfiiceps-etats
fo
sdael
dna
sgal
gnisu
snoitciderp
kaerbtuo
selsaem
serapmoc
elbat
sihT
:setoN
elbairav
tnedneped
ehT
.erusaem
mrof-decuder
eht
morf
sdael
dna
sgal
htiw
ledom
noitubirtsid
cimanyd
eht
morf
detareneg
yrotanalpxE
.worpotehtnidetacidnisasdoirepbusehtnidna)4–1snmuloc(0891–0591morfatipacrepsesacselsaemehtera
-decuder
eht
dna
ledom
).ipE(
lacigoloimedipe
eht
morf
devired
sa
)1+t(
dna
)1-t(
sraey
eht
ni
selbitpecsus
eht
era
selbairav
era
srorre
dradnatS
.stceffe
dexfi
etats
dna
trohoc
rof
lortnoc
snoisserger
llA
.)1+t(
dna
)1-t(
sraey
eht
ni
erusaem
)FR(
mrof
.level-%01/%5/%1
eht
ta
ecnacfiingis
lacitsitats
etacidni
*/**/***
.level
etats
eht
ta
deretsulc
6