NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MISPERCEPTIONS AND DEMAND FOR DEMOCRACY UNDER AUTHORITARIANISM
Daron Acemoglu
Cevat Giray Aksoy
Ceren Baysan
Carlos Molina
Gamze Zeki
Working Paper 33018
http://www.nber.org/papers/w33018
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2024, Revised March 2025
We are deeply grateful to Evrim Bal, Görkem Başaran, Özer Dondurmacıoğlu, Oltaç Ünsal, the
volunteers, and the Turkish-American Gezi Platform for their invaluable contributions; this
project would not have been possible without their support. The project received funding from the
Bradley and Hewlett Foundation, the Centre for Governance and Society at King’s College
London, and the Institute for Humane Studies (IHS017372). It was approved by the Bahçeşehir
University Institutional Review Board (Protocol ID: E-20021704-604.02.02-51326) and the MIT
Institutional Review Board (Protocol ID: E-4602) and registered with the AEA RCT registry
(AEARCTR-0011480). The views presented are solely those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Daron Acemoglu, Cevat Giray Aksoy, Ceren Baysan, Carlos Molina, and Gamze Zeki.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Misperceptions and Demand for Democracy under Authoritarianism
Daron Acemoglu, Cevat Giray Aksoy, Ceren Baysan, Carlos Molina, and Gamze Zeki
NBER Working Paper No. 33018
October 2024, Revised March 2025
JEL No. P16
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates whether enduring authoritarian regimes are in part rooted in the
population’s misperceptions about their social and economic costs—as opposed to a general
preference for authoritarianism. We explore this question using online and field experiments in the
context of Türkiye’s May 2023 presidential and parliamentary elections. We confirm that voters,
especially those supporting the incumbent authoritarian government systematically underestimate
both the extent to which democracy and media freedom have been eroded in Türkiye’ and their
usefulness in dealing with natural disasters and corruption (two salient issues in Türkiye). We find
that providing (accurate) information about the state and implications of democracy and media
freedom have significant effects on beliefs and increase the likelihood of voting for the opposition
by about 3.7 percentage points (6.2 percent) in the online experiment. In the field experiment, the
ballot-box level opposition vote share in neighborhoods receiving the information treatment
increases by 0.8 percentage point (1.5 percent). Interestingly, both in the field and online, the results
are driven not by further mobilizing opposition supporters, but by influencing those likely to vote
for the governing coalition and those holding more misperceived beliefs about democracy and
media freedom in Türkiye. The evidence suggests that at least part of the support for authoritarian
regimes may be coming from misperceptions about their institutions and policies, and may be more
malleable than typically presumed.
Daron Acemoglu Carlos Molina
Department of Economics, E52-446 University of South Carolina
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 1014 Greene St
77 Massachusetts Avenue Columbia, SC 29033
Cambridge, MA 02139 carlosmolinaguerra@gmail.com
and NBER
daron@mit.edu Gamze Zeki
Stockholm University
Cevat Giray Aksoy gamze.zeki@su.se
King’s College London
Bush House North East Wing
30 Aldwych
London WC2B 4BG
United Kingdom
and King's College London
cevat.aksoy@kcl.ac.uk
Ceren Baysan
University of Toronto
ceren.baysan@utoronto.ca

1 Introduction
A view pithily summarized by the French conservative philosopher Joseph de Maistre’s 1857
statement, “Toute nation a le gouvernement qu’elle m´erite” [Nations get the government
they deserve], explains enduring authoritarian governments in many countries around the
world by lack of true demand for democracy within their populations. This perspective
is often invoked in explaining why democracy will not take root in China or Russia (e.g.,
Huntington [1997], Gessen [2017], Mitter and Johnson [2021]). Yet, many authoritarian
regimes also control the media, repress dissent and use rigged elections and propaganda in
order to convince their populations that they are more democratic than they truly are (as
in Russia, Hungary or India today) or often argue that democracy would bring gridlock or
even chaos (as in China or Tu¨rkiye). This raises the possibility that the population may
hold misperceived beliefs about the state and the utility of democracy in their country.
We investigate these issues in the context of Tu¨rkiye’s May 2023 parliamentary and (two
rounds of) presidential elections, which The Economist Magazine described as the “most
important election of 2023” and crucial for “the future of democracy.”1 The election came
after more than 20 years of rule by Recep Tayyip Erdog˜an and his AKP (Justice and Devel-
opment) party, during which time, according to V-DEM data, the country experienced the
second largest deterioration in democratic institutions worldwide, only after Nicaragua (e.g.,
Freedom House [2024]). Consistent with the possibility that there may be systematic misper-
ceptions in the population, our baseline surveys reveal that Turkish voters, especially those
supporting the governing coalition, hold more optimistic views about how democracy and
media freedom/independence in the country have evolved since Erdog˜an came to power in
2003andmorepessimisticbeliefsaboutwhetherdemocracycanbemoresuccessfulindealing
with natural disasters and whether media freedom will be good for controlling corruption.2
We use an online experiment and a large-scale field experiment, involving 880,000 voters.
In both, we provide (accurate) information on the state and implications of democracy and
media freedom. This information reflects the actual evolution of Turkish institutions from V-
DEM data and findings in the literature on the relationship between democracy and natural
disasters on the one hand (e.g., Besley and Burgess [2002], Cao [2024], Kahn [2005]) and
media freedom and corruption on the other (e.g., Besley and Burgess [2002], Brunetti and
Weder [2003], Ferraz and Finan [2008], Larreguy et al. [2020]). These two issues were top
of mind for Turkish voters due to the massive February 2023 earthquake, which led to the
1See https://www.economist.com/special-report/2023/01/16/turkey-faces-a-crucial-election-this-
summer and https://www.economist.com/leaders/2023/05/04/if-turkey-sacks-its-strongman-democrats-
everywhere-should-take-heart [accessed 03/04/2025]
2Throughout, we use media freedom and media independence interchangeably.
1

deathsofmorethan50,000andthedisplacementofmorethanonemillionpeople. Theeffects
of the earthquake were greatly exacerbated because of unsafe building practices, which were
in turn enabled by corruption at both local and national levels.
Online, to gauge the extent of experimenter demand effects, we additionally provided
a placebo treatment, designed as in Acemoglu et al. [2020] that contained encouragement
but no actual information. We then investigated the effects of the information and placebo
treatments on self-reported individual beliefs and voting intentions. For ease of exposition,
forourmainresultsintheonlineexperimentwebundlethedemocracyandmediatreatments
together.
In our field experiment we adopted a non-partisan approach, and we initially contacted
all major parties and invited them to partner with us in a study about perceptions of
democracy and media independence. We emphasized that our objective was to understand
how each party defines and approaches democracy. Even though the two leading parties
from the governing coalitions did not accept to take part in our study, we tried to focus
our treatments on factual information as much as possible. Specifically, we provided two
versions of our informational treatment by using door-to-door canvassing randomized at the
level of neighborhoods and one of these, the research-based treatment, is purely factual and
based on consensus views in current research.3 We then used administrative electoral data
across ballot boxes to track actual voting outcomes. We also conducted additional cross-
randomizations in order to study how the affiliation of canvassers affected the credibility of
the informational treatments. As in the online experiment, we bundle the two treatments
together in our baseline results.
The key questions of interest in our experiments concern whether the information we
provide will be disregarded by Turkish voters—which would be evidence that they do not
care much about democratic institutions or have been firmly convinced by propaganda that
either Turkish institutions are sufficiently democratic and/or there is not much to gain
from greater democracy or media freedom. Alternatively, if participants’ beliefs and voting
intentions (in the online experiment) and voters’ actual choices (in the field experiment)
respond to our informational treatments, this would be evidence in favor of the hypothesis
that various types of misperceptions and inaccurate information are influencing the demand
for democracy and possible support for authoritarian leaders.
Our results in the two experiments consistently support the latter hypothesis and show
significant effects from the informational treatments. Online, we find that the bundled
3Thesecond,whichwecallthebasic informational treatment,includesmorepartisanlanguage. However,
note that this is a version of what our partners were planning to implement without our involvement, and
thus our study did not add further partisan language or canvassing strategies. We evaluate the effects of
both the research-based and the basic informational treatments.
2

informational treatment increases the respondents’ beliefs in the value of the institutions
(democracy or free media) and aligns their perceptions of the evolution of institutions with
reality. It also increases their likelihood of voting for the opposition by about 3.7 percentage
points (equivalent to a 6.2 percent increase relative to the mean). In contrast, the effects of
theplacebotreatmentaremuchsmaller(about0.5percentagepoints)andfarfromstatistical
significance.
In the field experiment, the bundled treatment—combining the research-based and basic
informational treatments—led to a 0.8 percentage point increase in the opposition’s vote
share at the ballot-box level (corresponding to a 1.5 percent rise relative to the mean) in the
first round of the presidential election and similar effects in the parliamentary elections and
in the second round presidential election.4 Perhaps surprisingly, we find that these effects in
the field persist and can be detected in the 2024 municipal elections, 10 months later.
A natural conjecture is that informational treatments would have little effect on the
views and voting intentions of those who support the government and/or believe that the
state of democracy is healthy in Tu¨rkiye; they may instead impact averages by mobilizing
and further motivating those already sympathetic to the opposition. Interestingly, we find
exactly the opposite pattern: Online and in the field, there are no aggregate turnout effects
and our estimates are larger for those who are supportive of the government and who have
greater misperceptions about the state and/or the utility of democracy and free media.
These results thus suggest that even simple informational treatments have the potential to
change misperceptions about democracy and its relevance to people’s lives. We also find
that information provided by non-affiliated canvassers, rather than affiliates of the two main
opposition parties, is viewed as more credible, which is consistent with the notion that
those leaning towards the incumbent coalition can respond to new and relevant information,
provided that they view it as credible (though the differences by affiliation are typically not
statistically significant).
Our paper is related to several literatures. First, we build on works that explore the de-
terminants of voters’ preferences for democratic institutions (e.g., Besley and Persson [2019],
Dahlum et al. [2024], Finkel et al. [2024], Fuchs-Schundeln and Schundeln [2015], Graham
and Svolik [2020], Persson and Tabellini [2009], Svolik [2023]). We contribute to this liter-
ature by documenting systematic misperceptions about the state and value of democratic
institutions and free media, and then showing that simple information campaigns can have
4The quantitative magnitude is smaller in the field in part because this number corresponds to an
intention-to-treat estimate—not all voters received the information in the field, while they all received it
online. We will also report two-stage least square estimates using completed conversations with our can-
vassers as the endogenous variable, and these results are more similar to our online estimates, as we discuss
below.
3

significant effects by correcting these misconceptions. Our result that voter misperceptions
and their assessment of the value of democracy and media freedom are at least partially
malleable and can be changed by the provision of accurate information has no equivalent in
this (or, to the best of our knowledge, any other) literature. We are also not aware of prior
work that implements a large-scale field experiment to study preferences for authoritarian-
ism and democracy. Combined with the finding that successful performance by democratic
governments builds support for democracy in Acemoglu et al. [2024], our findings raise the
possibility that misperceptions about democracy can become partly self-fulfilling—as long-
ruling authoritarian regimes cement misperceptions which then increase their support and
reduce the demand for democracy and media freedom. But our results also show that this
cycle can be broken by accurate and impartially-presented information.
Second, the themes explored in this paper are linked to the literature on the political
economy of information and persuasion. Several papers examine the impact of corruption
scandals on voter preferences (e.g., Arias et al. [2022], Chong et al. [2015], Enr´ıquez et al.
[2024], Ferraz and Finan [2008], Larreguy et al. [2020], Rivera et al. [2024]). For example,
Rivera et al. [2024] analyze over 170 high-profile corruption scandals involving leading politi-
cians across 17 Latin American countries, complemented by a field experiment in Mexico.
Enikolopov et al. [2011] and Knight and Tribin [2022], among others, study how traditional
mass media affects vote choice under authoritarian regimes or weak democracies. Relative
to this literature, our study focuses on misperceptions about democracy and media freedom,
and explores whether accurate and relevant information can rebuild support for more pro-
democracy candidates in elections, even in the shadow of intensifying authoritarianism. In
addition, issuesofmisperceptionsaremorerelevantinoursetting, whereafterapproximately
two decades of authoritarian rule, voters may have lost perspective on the state and value of
democratic institutions, including its importance for reducing corruption. We also leverage
our online and large-scale field experiment to explore the mechanisms via which these effects
work, which, to the best of our knowledge, has no equivalent in this literature either.
Third, another group of studies employs large-scale field experiments to assess the effec-
tiveness of political canvassing on voting choices (e.g., Bailey et al. [2016], Arceneaux and
Kolodny [2009], Cruz et al. [2020]). The majority of these studies are in the context of
established democracies and, with the exception of Pons [2018] which covered 5.02 million
registered voters during the 2012 French presidential election, involve relatively small sample
sizes (typically ranging from 1,000 to 70,000 voters). In addition to implementing a large-
scale field experiment in an authoritarian context, our focus on beliefs about the state and
value of democratic institutions, rather than standard campaigns for a candidate or policy,
4

distinguishes our paper from this literature.5
Fourth, our work is related to but different from several studies that have documented
polarizing effects of persuasion in authoritarian countries (Adena et al. [2015], Enikolopov
et al. [2023], Peisakhin and Rozenas [2018]). The closest study to ours, Baysan [2022], uses
administrative data to evaluate the impact of a randomized door-to-door partisan infor-
mation campaign on voter behavior in the 2017 Turkish constitutional referendum (which
proposed a transition to a strong presidential system and a de facto relaxation of President
Erdog˘an’s term limits). She finds that this information had a polarizing effect. We conjec-
ture that her results were perceived differently by voters, both because the desirability of
a strong executive was a highly-polarized issue at the time and also because the informa-
tional treatments, which included a call to oppose the constitutional change, may have been
interpreted as more directly critical of President Erdog˘an and his regime. The contrast of
our results with existing studies suggests that the exact context, content and presentation
of the information matters for whether it will have polarizing effects. The fact that our
treatments were based on factual and research-based information and were, to the extent
possible, presented in a non-partisan manner may have been important in communicating
with government supporters and with people with different baseline beliefs.
Finally, a long-running debate in political economy turns on whether informational
treatments influence voting outcomes through learning or persuasion (see DellaVigna and
Gentzkow[2010]foranoverview). Thereisrelativelylittleworkinthisliteraturethatfocuses
on authoritarian regimes, though Cruz et al. [2024a,b] provide evidence of voter learning and
persuasion in the context of 2019 Senate elections in the Philippines.6 Several aspects of our
work are distinctive relative to existing work in this area, including Cruz et al. [2024a,b]:
(i) we examine belief updating using data from our online experiment and show that our
treatments shift beliefs about democratic institutions, which in turn influence support for
authoritarian leader; (ii) we establish that, online, the learning effects are driven by the in-
formational treatment correcting existing misperceptions, and consistently with this, in the
5Thesettingofourstudy,takingplaceatanarguablecriticaljunctureforTurkishdemocracy[Callenetal.,
2024], combined with administrative data that allows us to observe true voting decisions, rather than self-
reports,isalsodistinctive,sinceinsuchsettingsrespondentsmayfeardisclosingsupportfortheoppositionor
expressing negative sentiments toward the ruling party. Several studies have highlighted additional benefits
oflargefieldexperiments,particularlywhencombinedwithadministrativevotingrecords. Notably,theyhelp
address concerns about low response rates and nonresponse bias, which can vary across treatment groups
[Wright, 1993, Atkeson, 1999, Campbell, 2010, Cardy, 2005, Bailey et al., 2016, Gelman et al., 2016, Pons,
2018].
6Relatedly, Kendall et al. [2015] show the presence of voter learning in responses to information cam-
paigns on local politician performance in Italy, and Dunning et al. [2019] find that nonpartisan information
campaignsdonotaffectvoterpreferencesorbeliefsonincumbentquality,includingamongtheleastinformed
voters.
5

field, our effects are driven by changes in voting patterns in government strongholds; (iii)
these results from the field experiment and our online placebo checks assuage concerns that
learning responses can be confounded by experimenter demand effects; (iv) we also show
persistent effects from the information we provide to voters in the field; and (v) to the best
ofour knowledge, ourstudy isthe firsttorandomize thesame informationalcampaignacross
partisan and nonpartisan sources to assess persuasion, which provides additional evidence
that the credibility of the source matters.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We start in the next section with some
basic context on the evolution of Turkish institutions over the last two decades and the
2023 election. Section 3 describes our experiments. Section 4 discusses the results from our
online experiment, while Section 5 turns to our main results, which are from the large-scale
field experiment. Section 6 discusses the potential mechanisms for our main findings, while
Section 7 concludes. The Appendix presents additional data descriptions and robustness
checks. The Online Supplementary Material contains detailed information about the online
and field experiments, including our survey instrument and figures.
2 Background
In this section, we provide a brief summary of the Turkish context before the 2023 elections.
2.1 Institutional and Social Changes in Tu¨rkiye under AKP Rule
Since coming to power in 2002, the AKP and its founding leader Recep Tayyip Erdo˜gan,
who became prime minister in 2003, have emerged as the dominant force in Turkish politics,
gaining more votes than any other party in all parliamentary elections over the last 22
years. The AKP initially supported economic and political reforms that had started before
its accession to power and worked to curb the influence of the secular Turkish military.
It even pursued various reforms expanding religious and minority rights, anti-corruption
efforts, and membership of the European Union. By the mid-2000s, however, the AKP’s
¨
enthusiasm for economic opening and political reform waned (Acemoglu and U¸cer [2019]).
Thiscoincidedbothwiththepartygainingsupremacyoverthecenter-right, withthecollapse
of all other center-right parties in Tu¨rkiye, and its survival from an attempt by the military
and secular elements of the bureaucracy to close it down and imprison its leaders, including
Erdog˜an. Around this time, Erdog˜an intensified his control over the party and adopted a
more authoritarian agenda, launching a gradually intensifying crackdown on the opposition
and independent media.
6

Figure 1 illustrates these trends using democracy scores from the V-DEM dataset. In
Panel A, we show the evolution of the overall democracy index, ranging from 0 to 100, with
higher values indicating more democratic institutions. A trend towards higher democracy
scores predates AKP’s accession to power, but this is reversed sometime in the mid-2000s,
and democracy in Tu¨rkiye starts a precipitous decline thereafter. Panel B shows that the
same pattern can be seen in all subcomponents of the democracy score, with the sharpest
fall being in the liberal and the deliberative aspects, which partly reflects the erosion of the
freedom of expression, media freedom and dissent in Tu¨rkiye.
2.2 The 2023 Elections
The 2023 parliamentary and presidential elections were seen as historic in Tu¨rkiye, in part
because discontent with AKP rule in some segments of the population was intensifying and
even some of Erdog˜an’s erstwhile allies had now turned against him. The economic situation
was indeed dire, with official inflation exceeding 70 percent (and the unofficial rate perhaps
being higher), in part because of unorthodox economic policies centered on low interest rates
favored and imposed on the central bank by President Erdog˜an himself. Concurrently, the
Turkish lira plummeted, losing 80 percent of its value between 2018 and 2023.7 Low interest
rates and government spending initially stimulated the economy, but there were also signs
that economic growth was flailing and the official unemployment rate reached about 10 per-
cent in January, 2023, even though many working-age Turks had already withdrawn from the
labor market.8 In the midst of intensifying poverty and economic hardship, the south of the
country suffered a massive (7.8 magnitude) earthquake in February 2023, killing more than
50,000 people and displacing more than a million. Although the earthquake itself was one of
the largest seen in the region, with several powerful and disruptive aftershocks, the expert
opinion blamed the death toll and the destruction on tens of thousands of buildings that
did not follow the building code, even in high earthquake-risk areas. It was also recognized
that this was a result of endemic local and national corruption, as well as a “building code
violation amnesty” which was promulgated by President Erdog˜an himself, allowing unsafe
buildings to remain in place. Even before the earthquake AKP censorship efforts had ex-
panded, with a 2022 law enabling the government to shut down all kinds of media outlets.
The law was used to stop social media communications after the earthquake.
7CNBC article on Turkish Lira’s record low against the dollar:
https://www.economist.com/leaders/2023/05/04/if-turkey-sacks-its-strongman-democrats-everywhere-
should-take-heart [accessed 03/04/2025]
8Unemployment rate data from the Turkish Statistical Institute:
https://data.tuik.gov.tr/Bulten/Index?p=Labour-Force-Statistics-January-2023-49386&dil=2 [accessed
03/04/2025]
7

In the midst of deepening economic problems, intensifying reactions against corrupt prac-
tices of the governing party, growing unpopularity of Erdog˜an among some segments of the
Turkish population, and the tragedy of the earthquake, many in civil society and within the
opposition started viewing the 2023 election as an opportunity to unseat Erdog˜an. This was
one of the factors leading to the formation of a broad coalition of opposition parties against
the government. Consequently, the 2023 elections was fought between three electoral blocs:
1. The People’s Alliance: This alliance comprised the ruling AKP and its partner,
the far right the Nationalist Movement Party (MHP). The alliance, which initially
formed in 2018, also included support from smaller right-wing and religious parties,
such as the Great Unity Party (BBP), the Islamist New Welfare Party (YRP) and
¨
the Kurdish Islamist Free Cause Party (HUDA-PAR). The presidential candidate of
the People’s Alliance was President Erdog˜an. The MHP contested the parliamentary
elections independently, but supported Erdo˜gan in the presidential race.
2. The Nation Alliance: This alliance was led by the main opposition, center-left
Republican People’s Party (CHP), which had been the main opposition party for most
of the AKP period and the ruler of Tu¨rkiye during the early Republican years. The
˙ ˙
alliance included the nationalist/center-right Good (IYI) Party, which had split off
fromthefar-rightMHP,theIslamistFelicityParty(SP),andthecentre-rightDemocrat
Party (DP), and two recent parties established by former AKP leaders, the Democracy
and Progress Party (DEVA) and the Future Party (GP). The presidential candidate
of the Nation Alliance was Kemal Kılıc¸daro˜glu.
3. The Labor and Freedom Alliance: This alliance was made up of the Kurdish
People’s Democratic Party (HDP) and various other Kurdish and left-wing parties. As
the election approached and with the likelihood of being disbanded by the authorities,
the HDP decided to participate in the elections under the umbrella of the Green Left
Party, which had been ruled eligible by the Supreme Election Council (YSK). This
alliance was not the main contender for the presidency and declared their support for
the Nation Alliance candidate Kılı¸cdarog˜lu before the election.
˙
Two other candidates were Muharrem Ince, a former leading figure in the CHP and
then the leader of the Homeland Party, who withdrew from the race three days prior to
the election, and Sinan Og˜an, from the anti-immigration, nationalist Ancestral Alliance.
Parliamentary elections and the first-round of the presidential elections were on May 14.
Despite some pre-election polls favoring the opposition, the People’s Alliance gained a
majority in parliament with 49.5 percent of the vote and 323 of the 600 seats, while the
8

Nation Alliance got 212 seats with 35 percent of the vote. President Erdog˜an came very
close to securing a majority in the first-round of the presidential election, with 49.5 percent
of the vote, against Kılı¸cdarog˜lu’s vote share of 44.9 percent. Because no candidate received
more than 50 percent of the vote, there was a second-round presidential election in two weeks
time, which President Erdo˜gan won handily, with 52.5 percent of the vote.
3 Experimental Design and Data
Our study is centered on informational treatments providing accurate information on the
state and implications of democracy and media freedom, and was carried out online and
in the field during April-May 2023. In this section, we describe the design of the two
experiments. Appendix Table A-1 provides definitions for all the variables used in the two
experiments.
3.1 Online Experiment
Recruitment and Sample The design of the online experiment is outlined in Appendix
Figure A-1. Between April 11 and May 27, 2023, we invited Turkish adults to participate in
an online study about Turkish institutions via Facebook ads. A total of 19,151 individuals
clicked on the ads and were redirected to the survey landing page, where they were offered
a consent form. Of these, 8,429 proceeded to start the survey. Participants were offered a
chance to earn 2,000 Turkish Liras (equivalent to 100 USD at the time) upon completing
the survey.
The survey consists of three parts: baseline questions, an (informational) intervention,
and endline questions. The baseline questions gathered information on socio-demographic
characteristics, political and social views and baseline perceptions of Turkish institutions.9
Participants who completed the baseline survey much faster or slower than the rest (in
particular, those three standard deviations above or below the median) were excluded from
the sample. A total of 5,161 respondents completed the baseline survey and were then
randomly assigned to two treatment groups, two placebo groups, and a control group, which
we describe in greater detail below. Following the informational treatment, participants
completed the endline survey, comprising the outcomes of interest as well as final questions
on perceptions of institutions and views towards political parties, as well as questions on
voting intentions. In total, 4,405 participants completed the endline survey, making up our
9The English version of the survey and additional details are available in our Online Supplementary
Material.
9

sample for analysis. Appendix Figure A-2 shows that there is no evidence of differential
attrition in our online experiment.
Informational Treatments As explained above, the main question of interest is whether
research-based, accurate information can alter misperceived beliefs about the state and sub-
stantive implications of institutions and, in this way, strengthen support for democratic
institutions in environments where the population has become less positive about democ-
racy under an authoritarian government. Given the salient issues in Tu¨rkiye, we focused
on two dimensions of national institutions, democracy and media, and their effects on two
metrics for success, dealing with natural disasters and controlling corruption. These institu-
tional features and metrics were validated in focus groups, qualitative fieldwork, and online
experimental pilots, where we found that they were easily understandable to and resonated
with Turkish voters (and did so more than other metrics, such as GDP growth rates, infla-
tion and rule of law related outcomes). It was also important for our purposes that we have
research-based evidence on the relationship between the chosen dimension of institutions
and the relevant metric, and in this case, we drew on evidence from Besley and Burgess
[2002], Cao [2024], Kahn [2005] and on the relationships between institutional quality and
mitigating the impact of natural disasters, and from Besley and Burgess [2002], Brunetti
and Weder [2003], Ferraz and Finan [2008], Larreguy et al. [2020] on the relationship be-
tween media independence and corruption. Based on this evidence, our two informational
treatments were:
• Media informational treatment: “According to research, as media independence
in a country worsens, corruption increases. Also, according to research, official data
shows that media independence has worsened and corruption has increased in Tu¨rkiye
in the last 30 years.”
• Democracyinformationaltreatment: “Accordingtoresearch,asdemocracystrength-
ens in a country, the number of buildings damaged by natural disasters and the number
of lives lost will decrease. Also, according to research, official data shows that democ-
racy has worsened in Tu¨rkiye in the last 30 years.”
Participants in the treatment groups could click a button to view supplementary sup-
porting evidence showing the evolution of the relevant institution (media or democracy) over
the years 1990, 2000, 2010, and 2022. We also presented the evolution of one of our outcome
metrics, corruption, over the same years in Tu¨rkiye, but could not do so for the relevant
outcome in the democracy informational treatment, since we do not have time-series data
10

on the effects of natural disasters.10 In our experiments, 65.9 percent of those who had the
option clicked on the button and viewed this supplementary information.11
In addition to the two informational treatments, a control group did not receive any
informational treatment, and two placebo groups received placebo treatments. This ap-
proach is motivated by possible “experimenter demand effects” whereby subjects may feel
encouraged to provide answers that align with what they think the experimenters would
like to hear (e.g., they may feel compelled to say that media freedom and democracy have
become worse in Tu¨rkiye). Our placebo treatments are designed to induce the same or even
stronger experimenter demand effects (because they make it clear what the experimenter’s
opinions are), but without providing credible new information, which builds on the strategy
in Acemoglu et al. [2020]. Therefore, we expect the placebo treatments to be informative
on the extent of experimenter demand effects and, under the hypothesis that they induce no
weaker experimenter demand effects, they can be used to net out these demand effects. The
placebo treatments are worded as follows:
• Media placebo treatment: “We talked to voters in Tu¨rkiye recently and a few
people said: Although I am not sure, I think that, as media independence in a country
worsens, corruption increases. Also, some people think that media independence has
worsened and corruption has increased in Tu¨rkiye in the last 30 years.”
• Democracy placebo treatment: “We talked to voters in Tu¨rkiye recently and a
few people said: Although I am not sure, I think that, as democracy strengthens, the
number of buildings damaged by natural disasters and the number of lives lost will
decrease. Also, some people think that democracy has worsened in Tu¨rkiye in the last
30 years.”
After the treatments, all participants, including those in the control group, were invited
to continue with the survey and complete the endline questions.
Our design also included variations in how the information was presented, with cross-
randomization between formulations that differed on whether they mentioned media inde-
pendence or democracy improvements leading to better outcomes or deteriorations leading
to worse outcomes. At the end, we do not find major differences between these different
10Additional details are available in our Online Supplementary Material.
11In the treatment group, we also collected data on perceptions of the trustworthiness of the V-DEM
data, which is the source of our statements about the state of democracy. Among those who clicked on
the figure, 42% trust it, 12% are neutral, 27% distrust it, 8% are unsure, and 11% did not respond. These
resultsindicatethatthereisconsiderabletrustinthisinformationsource. Theseresponsesalsosuggestthat
participants are comfortable disagreeing with the experimenter, thus providing another piece of evidence
that experimenter demand effects are not very strong in this sample.
11

framings for our main outcomes of interest, motivating us to describe the details and the
results from different cross-randomizations only in the Appendix (see Appendix Table A-2).
Outcome Variables We collected our main outcome variables for our online experiment
in the baseline and endline surveys. These are:
(1) beliefs about the state of institutions (in particular, individual perceptions on changes
in democracy or media freedom since 2000) and the effectiveness of these institutions (the
impact of freedom of media on the control of corruption and the impact of democracy on
effective responses to natural disasters). Specifically, we constructed two key perception
variables. The first, which we call Valuation of Institutions, measures the extent to which
individuals believe that democratic institutions are important for achieving better outcomes.
This variable is constructed by averaging two seven-point scales, assessing the respondents’
level of agreement with the following statements: “Increasing media independence in a coun-
try will reduce corruption in the future” and “Strengthening democracy in a country will
reduce the number of people affected by natural disasters in the future.” The second belief
variable is State of Institutions, which measures perceptions about how the relevant insti-
tution has evolved in Tu¨rkiye. This variable is constructed by taking the average of two
five-point scales that assess the extent to which both media and democracy are perceived
to be better today (April-May, 2023) than they were in 2000. Throughout the rest of the
paper we standardize these two perception variables, so magnitudes always refer to standard
deviation units.
(2) turnout intentions.
(3) intentions of voting for the opposition.
We also collected a battery of individual-level demographic variables, as detailed in Ap-
pendix Table A-3.
3.2 Field Experiment
Recruitment and Sample In December 2022, we extended invitations to the five parties
˙ ˙
represented in parliament, AKP, CHP, HDP, IYI Party, and MHP, to participate in our
study. We directed our communications—an initial invitation email and one subsequent
follow-up—to both the general secretary of each party and the principal local contacts in
˙ ˙
Tu¨rkiye’s three largest provinces, Ankara, Istanbul, and Izmir. Our communications briefly
introduced our research team, outlined the study’s objectives, and requested a meeting to
further discuss the study’s nature.12 CHP and the I ˙ YI ˙ Party responded to our invitation and
12Additional details are available in our Online Supplementary Material.
12

˙
the door-to-door information campaigns were administered in Izmir, Tu¨rkiye’s third-largest
province, in collaboration with these two parties, between April 14 and May 12 of 2023.
To ensure uniformity in the campaign across different neighborhoods, all canvassers un-
derwent training organized by their own party and received uniform instructions on basic
techniques for engaging with voters and relevant information on the campaign. Some can-
vassers were asked to work with a civic, non-partisan organization, SahadaBiriz, and we refer
to these as non-affiliated canvassers.
All canvassers were instructed to knock on each door and deliver the information to an
adult member of the household. After introducing themselves, the canvassers initiated a
brief conversation during which the relevant informational treatment was delivered. They
were told to politely present the information, not to attempt to be persuasive, and to end the
conversation immediately if the voter wanted them to. In addition, they were told to listen
carefully and not rush to the next door if the voter wanted to continue the conversation.
This protocol was provided by the campaign managers and role-played during the training.
The conversation content was guided by pamphlets that varied according to the treatment
assignment, whichwedescribebelow. Canvasserswereinstructedtoleaveapamphletbehind
the door even when conversations were not completed (e.g., when no one was at home).
Canvassers logged their interactions with each household, noting completed conversations,
pamphlet distributions, instances where doors were not opened, or rejections after the door
was opened. To facilitate more efficient canvassing, we also geocoded each street within the
neighborhoods and provided canvassers with an optimized route to follow.
Randomization between different informational treatments and the control group, as well
as other cross-randomization, were at the neighborhood level, and we used data from the
June 24, 2018 parliamentary election to exclude from our sample neighborhoods that were
too remote or that would require more time that our canvassers had for visiting a sufficient
number of voters. We ended up with a final experimental sample of 554 neighborhoods,
out of which 252 were randomly selected as treatment neighborhoods.13 These treatment
neighborhoods contained 404,862 voters according to our 2018 parliamentary election rolls.
See Appendix Table A-4 for details.
Treatments To simplify the field experiment, we focused on media freedom and corrup-
tion. The key dimension of our randomization was between two informational treatments
and a control group. The first informational treatment, which we call research-based infor-
mational treatment, aimedatprovidinginanimpartialmannerthemostcredibleinformation
13Fortherandomizationsforeachtreatmentgroup,wechoseawell-balancedsamplefrom100,000possible
re-randomizationstominimizerandomimbalances,followingtheapproachoutlinedbyBanerjeeetal.[2017].
13

we had on the basis of research articles. We also implemented a basic informational treat-
ment, which used less impartial and more concrete/evocative language about media freedom
and corruption. It contained a call to action, consistent with the opposition parties’ agenda.
These two treatments had their own separate pamphlets that were shared with households.
In addition, we also cross-randomized according to the identity of the canvassers—from
˙ ˙
either the CHP, or the IYI Party, or non-affiliated canvassers. This second dimension of
randomization will feature in our interpretations and discussions, but is not central to our
main results.
The exact texts for these two treatments were:
• Research-based informational treatment:
Impartial and independent media play a vital role in democracies. Researchers state
that unbiased and independent media are critical in providing accurate information to
the public.
Researchers state that as media independence worsens, corruption increases.
When the media does not report on corruption, real and accurate information is hidden
from the public, making it easier to hide corruption.
Official data show that media neutrality and independence have declined rapidly in
Tu¨rkiye in the last 30 years.
The pamphlet also depicted the decline of media independence and the rise of corruption
in Tu¨rkiye over a 30-year period and showed a figure illustrating the indices of media inde-
pendence and corruption for 1990, 2000, 2010, and 2022 from V-DEM. The pamphlets for
˙ ˙
this treatment, separately for non-affiliated, CHP and IYI Party canvassers, are presented
in the left column of Appendix Figure A-3.
• Basic informational treatment:
One of Tu¨rkiye’s biggest problems is corruption.
Transparency and accountability are the foundation for a better future.
Say no to corruption, look to the future with hope.
To fight corruption, today is the time for change.
Become a partner in our demand for transparency in Tu¨rkiye.
Let’s protect democracy together.
14

˙ ˙
The pamphlet for this treatment, again separately for non-affiliated, CHP and IYI Party
canvassers, are presented on the right of Appendix Figure A-3, which corresponds, from top
˙ ˙
to bottom, non-affiliated, CHP, and IYI Party, respectively.
The basic informational treatment is included in part because all parties were intending
to carry out a similar door-to-door campaign. So in order to convince both opposition
and government coalition parties, our invitation did not require them to discontinue their
campaigns and the parties that agreed to our study chose to keep their pre-existing plans,
but allowed us to add our research-based treatment. They also did not agree to any type
of placebo treatment. Although we worked with them in the exact wording of the basic
informational treatment, our interpretation is that this would have been implemented more
or less at the same scale without our involvement, and hence, we believe that its effects on
voters and actual vote shares would have occurred without our study.
Ex ante, we were unsure about which of the two treatments would be more effective. The
first contains higher-quality, more impartial information, while the second may be easier for
voters to understand and can also motivate them to turn out, which was a priority for our
local partners.14
Outcome Variables In the field experiment, our outcome variables come from adminis-
trative data on ballot box-level vote shares and turnout, which we obtained from the website
of the Turkish Supreme Election Council.15
4 Results from the Online Experiment
In this section, we discuss our empirical strategy and present the headline results from the
online experiment. In the next subsection, we turn to the field experiment, and then discuss
mechanisms combining data from both online and field experiments in Section 6.
14As noted in the footnote on the cover page, our study was pre-registered on May 24, 2023, between the
firstandsecondroundsofthepresidentialelection. Theadministrativevotingrecordsforbothelectionswere
released on June 5th, eight days after the second presidential election. We also pre-registered in the same
pre-analysis plan an individual-level randomization in the field to evaluate the impact of our treatment on
individual-levelsurveydata. However, wewereunabletocollectendlinedata, astheoverwhelmingmajority
of the baseline respondents who had initially agreed to participate in the endline survey later refused to do
so as the environment became more politically charged closer to the election.
15Although we have data at the ballot-box level, we cannot track ballot boxes over time, because multiple
ballot boxes were located at the same address and we can only observe their exact location in 2023. This
explains our choice of conducting the randomization at the neighborhood level.
15

4.1 Empirical Strategy for Online Experiment
To simplify the exposition and maximize statistical power, we start with bundled treatments,
whereby the media and democracy informational treatments are combined, and the media
and democracy placebo treatments are also bundled. We later study the effects of each
treatment separately.
Throughout,wepresentaveragetreatmenteffectsbydifferenttypesoftreatments. Rather
than a comparison of means, we do this by running ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions,
because there are some minor imbalances in pre-treatment covariates between treatment and
control groups, as we describe in the next section.
Throughouttheonlineexperiment, allcomparisonsarebetweenindividuals, andreported
effects are from the following OLS model:
Y = π +βT +θP +X′γ +ε , (1)
i i i i i
where Y represents one of our outcomes of interest for individual i—self-reported beliefs
i
aboutstateofinstitutions, valuationofinstitutions, votingintentionsandturnoutintentions.
The key right-hand side variables, T and P , are dummies for informational and placebo
i i
treatments. In our main specification, because the media and democracy treatments are
combined, the variables T and P are dummies for (bundled) informational and placebo
i i
treatments. In addition, X is a vector of pre-treatment characteristics, which we include
i
as covariates. The error term ε captures for all omitted characteristics, and we allow it to
i
be heteroscedastic and report robust standard errors in all regressions. Because the control
group is always omitted, the coefficients β and θ give us the average treatment effects relative
to the control group. We also report p-values for the treatment and the placebo effects being
different.
4.2 Summary Statistics and Balance
Panel A of Appendix Table A-5 provides summary statistics for the main post-treatment
variables and Appendix Table A-3 presents summary statistics and balance tests for baseline
characteristics in the online experiment. We have 4,405 participants, separated between 877
participants for the media informational treatment, 869 for the democracy informational
treatment, 848 for the media placebo treatment, 904 for the democracy placebo treatment,
and 907 in the control group. Given the limited number of participants in this online exper-
iment, some imbalance in pre-treatment characteristics is expected. On the whole, however,
our groups appear relatively well balanced. Out of the 56 tests for balance, only two (per-
ceived level of institutions in 2023 and fighting inflation as a top government priority) show
16

statistical differences at the 5% level between treatment and control groups, and only five
show differences at the 10% level, which is consistent with sampling variation.
Note that despite the lack of major imbalances given our sample size, whether we control
for some of these statistically insignificant pre-treatment characteristics may still matter for
our estimates and we explore this issue in our robustness analysis.
4.3 Voters’ Baseline Views
Ouronlineexperimentalsoenablesustomeasurethebaselineviewsofsupportersofdifferent
parties on the state and valuation of institutions, which will be helpful in interpreting our
experimental results. In this subsection, we summarize these results, focusing on voters
supporting the three blocs with representation in parliament: the People’s Alliance (AKP
˙ ˙
and MHP), shown consistently in yellow; the Nation Alliance (CHP and IYI Party), shown
in dark blue; and HDP, shown in grey.16
Panel A of Figure 2 shows on the left that participants who voted for the governing
coalition in 2018 are much more likely to report that autocracy is sometimes preferable to
democracythanarethosewhosupportedtheothertwocoalitionsorthosewhodidnotvotein
2018 (this is the question we use in the baseline survey for measuring their attitudes towards
democracy). On the right, we see that government supporters in the control group have
significantly different valuation of institutions as well (using the index described in Section
3, which is measured at the endline). Relatedly, Appendix Figure A-5 shows that opposition
supporters are also more likely to support a democratic government over an authoritarian
one relative to government coalition supporters.
Panel B of Figure 2 shows summary statistics on voters’ perceptions of how media inde-
pendence and democracy have evolved in Tu¨rkiye. The left panel depicts perceived changes
in media independence, while the right panel is for perceived changes in democracy between
2000 and 2022 (see also Appendix Figure A-6 for the levels in 2000 and 2022 separately).
We represent the actual change in the V-DEM dataset by the dashed line. The pattern that
emergesisquiteclear: supportersofthegoverningcoalitionhaveamuchmorefavorableopin-
ion of how media independence and democracy have evolved, and if we take V-DEM data
as ground truth, they are holding significantly more misperceived opinions, while the views
of opposition supporters are broadly in line with the actual decline in media independence
and democracy scores.17
16Appendix Figure A-4 compares vote shares from the 2018 parliamentary election with the self-reported,
pre-treatment voting intentions in our sample, and shows that they are closely aligned.
17As noted in footnote 11, we also conducted a baseline survey of a randomly-selected subset of voters in
the field experiment. However, after the elections, nearly all of those who had agreed to the baseline survey
no longer wanted to participate, and newly sampled voters also declined to take part. Although we are
17

4.4 Experimental Results: Voter Beliefs
We now report the experimental estimates of the informational treatments on voter beliefs.
The main results are presented in Panel A of Figure 3. The left part of Panel A is for
the valuation of institutions, while the right part is for the state of institutions (Appendix
Figure A-8 additionally reports treatment effects on the two components that make up each
of these outcomes). In both panels, we first show the average for the control group, then
we present the bundled treatment effects for the placebo (in green) and the informational
treatment (in blue), and subsequently we separate the placebo and informational treatment
effects between media and democracy treatments. In each case, we provide the two standard
deviation confidence intervals and p-values for these estimates being statistically different
from the control group’s beliefs, and at the top we also report the p-value for the placebo
and the informational treatment effects being statistically distinguishable from each other.
The point estimates are also reported in Tables 1 and A-6. In this subsection we focus on
Figure 3, which presents the main takeaways in the most transparent manner.
We see clearly that informational treatments have led to a significant change in the
beliefs of the respondents. In the bundled treatment, there is a difference of 6.5 percent of
a standard deviation in the valuation of institutions between the informational treatment
and the control groups; this difference is statistically significant at less than 5%. There
is no difference between the control group and the placebo treatment. Moreover, we can
comfortably reject that the informational and the placebo treatments are equal. When we
separate the media and the democracy treatments, the pattern is similar, though the results
are slightly less precise, since the gain in statistical power obtained by combining the two
experiments is lost.
In terms of quantitative magnitudes, the difference between the informational treatment
group and the control group is sizable—approximately half (58 percent) of the difference in
the valuation of institutions between individuals in our control group who reached tertiary
education and those who did not.
On the right, we see a very similar pattern. The informational treatment leads to a
decline of 6.8 percent of one standard deviation in perceived beliefs about how the state of
institutionshavechangedsince2000; thiseffectisstatisticallydifferentfromthecontrolmean
at less than 1%, and statistically distinguishable from the placebo effect at about 1%. The
results are also similar when we separate the media and democracy treatments. Specifically,
with the media treatment, the results and their statistical significance are very similar to the
consequently unable to use these data for studying the effects of informational treatments, Appendix Figure
A-7 shows that differences in the field between the views of government and opposition supporters on the
evolution of democracy and media freedom are very similar to those we report from our online experiment.
18

bundled treatment, and they are a little less precise for the democracy treatment. Likewise,
in terms of quantitative magnitudes, we also find that our treatment effect is half (exactly
50 percent) of the difference in how individuals with and without tertiary education perceive
the state of institutions.
Overall,theresearch-basedinformationweprovideonlineappearstohavechangedvoters’
self-reported beliefs both about the valuation (effectiveness) of institutions and about how
institutions have evolved in Tu¨rkiye since 2000. The direction of change is towards what we
interpret as ground truth from the V-DEM data, and thus we can interpret these results as
informational treatments correcting voter misperceptions about how beneficial democratic
institutionsareandhowmuchtheyhavebeenerodedunderanauthoritarianleader. Notably,
compared to our informational treatments, the placebo treatment effects are much smaller
and have no statistically significant in almost all cases.
4.5 Experimental Results: Voting
Panel B of Figure 3 shows the impact of the informational and placebo treatments on the
self-reported voting intentions, using exactly the same structure as in Panel A. The same
results and variations are also shown in Panel C of Table 1 and Appendix Table A-6.
The bundled treatment is estimated to increase the probability of voting for the oppo-
sition by 3.7 percentage points compared to the control group (equivalent to a 6.2 percent
increase relative to the mean). The placebo treatment has a very small and statistically
insignificant coefficient, and the gap between the informational and the placebo treatments
is quite substantial—3.2 percentage points. The informational treatment effects are statis-
tically significant at less than 1%, and so is the difference between the informational and
placebo treatments, as shown in Panel B of Figure 3. When we separate the media and
democracy treatments, we find very similar patterns, and in this case, we have enough sta-
tistical power to statistically distinguish informational treatments from both the control
group and the placebo treatments as well.
The quantitative magnitudes are again substantial. The difference between the informa-
tional treatment and control groups is approximately 10 percent of the opposition vote share
˙
difference between Izmir (the city where our field experiment takes place and an opposition
stronghold) and cities such as Konya and Kayseri, which are government strongholds.
The right-hand side of Panel B of Figure 3 also shows the results for self-reported turnout
intentions, and in this case, we do not find statistically significant effects of the informational
treatment. We return to the interpretation of this finding in Section 6.
Overall, we estimate that the informational treatment not only changes people’s self-
19

reported beliefs about the state and valuation of institutions, but also makes them more
willing to vote for opposition parties, and the results are quantitatively and statistically
quite significant.
4.6 Robustness
The results reported so far are quite robust. One important dimension of robustness pertains
to the set of controls, since, as already noted, there are a few variables that show imbalances
between the treatment and control groups in our online experiment and, given the limited
size of our online sample, even insignificant differences could have effects on estimates. In
Table 1, we see that varying the control set does not have a major impact on the results,
though the magnitudes of the informational treatment become somewhat smaller when we
control for the pre-treatment values of the dependent variables on the right-hand side of the
regression. When we additionally include pre-treatment characteristics which show imbal-
ancesbetweenthetreatmentandcontrolgroupsand/orwhenwecontrolforallpre-treatment
characteristics, this makes no further difference relative to the specification that controls just
for pre-treatment outcome variables. In all cases, the informational treatment remains in
the same direction as in Figure 3 and statistically different from both the control group and
the placebo treatment effects.
In summary, the online experiment shows powerful effects from the informational treat-
ments on beliefs and self-reported voting intentions. Our results are suggestive that these
reflect people’s response to new information—rather than their responses to experimenter
demand effects—since we do not see similar impacts from the placebo treatments. The
weakness of the online experiment is that all of the outcome variables are self-reported. We
next turn to our main results, which are from a large-scale field experiment combined with
administrative data, thus rectifying this concern.
5 Main Results: Field Experiment
In this section we discuss our main results from the field experiment. We start with our
empirical strategy, which is different from the one in the online experiment, since treatment
is now at the neighborhood level. We then turn to descriptive statistics and balance tests,
before proceeding to our main results.
20

5.1 Empirical Strategy
In our field experiment, we estimate causal effects at the ballot-box level. Our main results
report intention-to-treat (ITT) estimates, which capture the impact of being assigned to
different informational treatments. Formally, we estimate
Y = α+γT +X′ κ+u , (2)
bn n bn bn
where Y represents the outcome of interest—the opposition’s vote share and turnout in the
bn
2023 parliamentary and presidential elections and 2024 municipal elections—at the ballot-
box level b in neighborhood n. T is the neighborhood-level treatment variable (either a
n
dummy for a bundled treatment or a vector when we separate the treatments). The vector
X represents various ballot box and neighborhood characteristics we control for in our
bn
specifications. In the baseline specification, we follow our pre-analysis plan and include the
following variables in the vector of controls:18 the number of registered voters at each ballot
box in 2023, ballot-box geographic controls (population density, precipitation, temperature,
˙
ruggedness, distancetoIstanbul, anddistancetothecoast), neighborhood-levelcontrolsfrom
the 2018 election (opposition’s vote share, turnout, and number of registered voters), as well
as dummies for different regions and strata fixed effects, which are based on the sextiles of
the2018votesharefortheoppositionalliance.19 Finally, u denotesanerrortermcapturing
bn
all omitted factors influencing voting outcomes at ballot box b in neighborhood n. The ITT
estimates are given by the coefficients on the different treatment variables.
In our main specification, the research-based and basic informational treatments are
combined together, thus giving us an analogue of the bundled treatment in the previous
section, but in later specifications, we also separate these two different types of treatments.
In the field experiment, we do not have a placebo treatment, but given that the outcome is
actual voting behavior, experimenter demand effects are less likely to be important in this
context and we have already seen that they are not that important in the online experiment.
Because randomization was conducted at the neighborhood level, we report standard
errors that are robust to heteroscedasticity and clustered at the neighborhood level through-
out. Given that the number of ballot boxes in a neighborhood is closely correlated with the
number of voters, we present unweighted regression results. For robustness, we also provide
results from regressions weighted by the number of actual voters at the ballot-box level in
18Our pre-analysis plan specified that we would control for neighborhood-level variables because we were
unsure whether ballot box-level data would be available. Since we have gained access to these data, we now
include more granular controls on the right-hand side and present the very similar results from alternative
specifications with just neighborhood-level controls in the Online Supplementary Material.
19Weconstructedthesefixedeffectsbydividingthefullrangeofoppositionvotesharesintosixequal-sized
groups (sextiles) and stratifying the randomization by sextile.
21

the Online Supplementary Material, which exhibit very similar patterns.
5.2 Summary Statistics, Balance and Compliance
Panel B of Appendix Table A-5 provides summary statistics for the main post-treatment
variables in the field experiment and Appendix Table A-7 presents summary statistics and
balance tests for the field experiment based on the baseline covariates. There is no evidence
of any statistically significant imbalances in any of our variables, but the 2018 opposition
vote share is two percentage points lower in the research-based treatment group than in the
control group, and one percentage points higher in the basic treatment group than in the
control group. Though far from statistical significance (p-value for joint significance is 0.28),
these are nontrivial differences and we confirm later in this section that controlling for 2018
vote shares does not have a major impact on our results.
Appendix Table A-8 shows that, on average, 35 percent of visits resulted in canvassers
successfully completing the conversations and distributing the pamphlets to households.
There is also no evidence that completion rates differed systematically between the research-
based informational treatment and the basic informational treatment, but they do appear
to be significantly different by canvasser affiliation, with non-affiliated canvassers having the
highest completion rate. This difference is largely driven by the capacity constraints faced
˙ ˙
by IYI Party, which had a smaller number of canvassers.
5.3 Main Results from the Field Experiment
Figure 4 presents our main results, with the point estimates reported in Table 2. Panel
A displays the effects of the bundled treatments on the opposition vote shares in the first-
round and second-round presidential elections and the parliamentary elections. Panel B
shows turnout effects, while Panel C looks at longer-term effects by focusing on the 2024
municipal elections.
The informational treatment has a statistically significant and quantitatively substantive
effect on opposition vote shares. These (ITT) results indicate a precisely-estimated 0.8 per-
centage point increase in the opposition vote share in the first-round presidential election
(equivalent to a 1.5 percent increase relative to the mean).20 The point estimates are com-
20The quantitative magnitude of our estimates is broadly similar to, but generally smaller than, those
reportedinotherstudiesanalyzingtheeffectsofpoliticalcampaignsonvoteshares. Cruzetal.[2024b]show
thattheirdoor-to-doorcampaignledtoa7percentagepointincreaseinself-reportedsupportforopposition
candidates, whichismuchlargerthanourestimates. Pons[2018]reportsthatprecinctstreatedwithadoor-
to-door intervention encouraging support for Hollande’s candidacy in the 2012 French presidential elections
increased his vote share by 0.8 percentage point, which is identical to our ITT estimate.
22

parable, and also similarly statistically significant, in the second-round presidential election
and the parliamentary election (Panel A). Using the same benchmark as in our online exper-
iment results, the quantitative magnitude of the ITT estimates corresponds to an increase
in the opposition vote share equivalent to 2.2 percent of the average difference between the
˙
opposition stronghold Izmir and the government strongholds, Konya and Kayseri.
The quantitative magnitudes from our field experiment are smaller than the estimates
in the online experiment. This is in part because the former are ITT estimates, since, as
Appendix Table A-8 indicates, only about 35 percent of households had completed conver-
sations with canvassers in treated neighborhoods. In contrast, all participants in the online
experiment received the intended information. If the 0.8 percentage point effect is scaled by
1/0.35, it becomes much more similar to the online estimates (2.2 percentage points com-
pared to 3.7 percentage points online). A different way of comparing the quantitative effects
of our field and online experiments is to look at two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimates,
using the actual delivery of information (e.g., completed conversations with canvases) as the
endogenous regressor.21 We do this in Appendix Table A-9, and the quantitative magnitudes
are indeed more comparable to the online experiment this case. For example, full compliance
(a 100 percentage point increase in completed conversations) in the first-round presidential
election would raise the opposition’s vote share by 2.2 percentage points.
Panel B of Figure 4 shows that, as in the self-reported results online, there is no impact
on turnout. This means, in particular, that the vote share results in Panel A are not driven
by higher aggregate turnout.
Interestingly, inPanelCofFigure4, weseeasignificantpositiveeffectontheopposition’s
vote share in the 2024 municipal elections, about a year after our experiment. This result
suggests that accurate information may have swayed some voters sufficiently to alter their
long-term allegiances and/or voting patterns. Panel B of Table 2 also shows that there are
no turnout effects in the 2024 municipal elections.22
Figure 5 presents the estimates of the research-based and basic informational treatments
21Formally, the 2SLS models can be written as Y = α+γC +X′ κ+u , where C is the fraction
bn n bn bn n
of households in neighborhood n with completed conversations, which is instrumented by the treatment
dummies (with the estimates in Appendix Table A-8 corresponding to the first stage). One reason why we
prefertheITTestimatesasourbaselineisthat, asourOnlineSupplementaryMaterialshows, informational
treatments did not only increase completed conversations with canvassers, but also initiated but not com-
pleted conversations and pamphlet deliveries, which may have also transmitted information to voters. This
can be viewed as a violation of the exclusion restriction of the 2SLS results with completed conversations as
the endogenous regressor. This problem does not arise in our ITT estimates.
22Whilesomestudies,suchasCoppockandGreen[2016]andFujiwaraetal.[2016],suggestthatvotingcan
be habit-forming, habit-formation in support for one party versus another seems less natural. We therefore
interpretourfindingofpersistenteffectsontheoppositionvoteshareasbeingduetothelong-lastingeffects
of the informational treatment.
23

separately and also depicts heterogeneous effects by canvasser affiliation. The main take-
aways are as follows. First, voters are slightly more responsive to the research-based in-
formational treatment, but the difference with the basic informational treatments is not
statistically significant. One possible interpretation, which we find ex ante plausible but
are not able to verify, is that some voters respond more to high-quality information, while
others may understand and respond more to basic information, which also has some sloga-
neering element. When averaged out across different types of voters, the two treatments give
relatively comparable average effects.
The second important finding in Figure 5 is that voters respond more to non-affiliated
canvassers than to those affiliated with the opposition parties, though the differences are
typically not statistically significant. This is quite plausible, since some voters will attach
greater credibility to non-affiliated canvassers and the information they provide. We return
to an interpretation of this dimension of heterogeneity in the next section.
5.4 Robustness
As already briefly mentioned, Table 2 presents the (ITT) estimates with different controls,
including vote shares in the 2018 parliamentary election. Varying the set of covariates has
essentially no effect on the point estimates in the field experiment, though estimates that do
notcontrolforvotingoutcomesin2018arelesspreciseandnotalwaysstatisticallysignificant
at 5%. This is because vote shares are very persistent between 2018 and 2023, and omitting
them increases the noise in vote shares, which is what motivated our main specification
including the opposition vote share in 2018, as indicated in our pre-analysis plan.
Appendix Table A-10 examines the robustness of our main results for the unbundled
treatment, distinguishing between research-based and basic informational treatments or by
canvasseraffiliation. Theresultsareverysimilartoourbaselineestimates,withtheexception
that the magnitude of the research-based treatment effect is lower and that of the basic
treatment is higher when we only include strata fixed effects (columns 1, 4, 7 and 10). This
is due to the differences in the opposition vote share in 2018, noted above, and given this
difference, we believe that the estimates that control for the opposition vote share in 2018 are
more reliable. In any case, the informational treatments are always statistically significant
and the overall picture is very similar across specifications.
In sum, our field experiment provides strong support for the hypothesis that, when con-
fronted with accurate information, voters can change their votes, and to the extent that this
information corrects misperceptions about the valuation/effectiveness of democratic institu-
tions as well as about the state of institutions under authoritarian leaders, it can bolster
24

support for more pro-democratic parties (or reduce support for authoritarian incumbents).
6 Mechanisms
In this section, we argue that the results presented so far are driven in large part because our
accurate informational treatments convinced voters who had greater misperceptions about
thestateofTurkishinstitutionsandwhowerepreviouslymorelikelytosupportthegoverning
coalition.
To start with, recall that we find no aggregate turnout effects either in the online or the
field experiments. Hence, a simple story based on mobilizing opposition voters already looks
less likely on the basis of this finding.
More directly, Figure 6 presents the heterogeneous treatment effects based on whether
respondents in the online experiment overestimated or underestimated the deterioration of
institutionalqualityfrom2000totoday(April-May, 2023). Thetoppaneldisplaystheresults
for those who underestimated the deterioration of institutional quality at baseline, while the
bottom panel presents the results for those who overestimated or accurately estimated the
deterioration of institutional quality. The figure demonstrates that our results are driven by
participants in the top panel. These are the people who, after the informational treatment,
changed their valuation of institutions and their assessment of the state of institutions,
and then became more likely to vote for the opposition. The interpretation that this is a
consequence of the accurate, research-based information is also bolstered by the fact that
we do not see a quantitatively important or statistically significant effect from the placebo
treatment in this top panel.23
In contrast to this pattern, we do not detect any positive effects on either one of our
three outcome variables from the informational treatment in the bottom panel (the exact
point estimates are presented in Appendix Table A-11).
We find the same general pattern in our field experiment. In particular, Figure 7 presents
(ITT) estimates that are heterogeneous by the vote share of the opposition in the 2018
parliamentary election at the neighborhood level. The top panel is for neighborhoods where
the vote share of the opposition was below median—which can broadly be thought of as
neighborhoods supporting the governing coalition. The bottom panel is for neighborhoods
where the opposition’s vote share was above the median in 2018.24 The pattern is quite
clear: our field experiment results are driven by the neighborhoods in the top panel, where
23Appendix Figures A-9 and A-10 show similar patterns by separating participants between those who
were neutral or favorable towards authoritarianism versus those who were unfavorable, and also between
those who self-reported voting for or against the governing coalition in 2018.
24The point estimates of this figure are presented in Appendix Table A-12.
25

the informational treatment effects in all three 2023 elections are much larger than in the
bottom panel. The effects for the two rounds of the presidential election are also statistically
significantat5%andtheonefortheparliamentaryelectionissignificantat10%. Incontrast,
theimpactoftheinformationaltreatmentismuchsmallerandfarfromstatisticalsignificance
in the bottom panel.25 Similarly, consistently with the online experiment, Appendix Figure
A-12 confirms this heterogeneity is only present in vote choices and not turnout.
These results therefore suggest two noteworthy conclusions. First, our informational
treatments were viewed as credible, including by a significant fraction of government sup-
porters. Second, and partially as a result of the first observation, the informational treat-
ments had a bigger impact on those that had more misperceived baseline beliefs about either
the state of democratic institutions in Tu¨rkiye or their effectiveness in delivering policies and
outcomes desired by the population.
If this is indeed the correct mechanism, it points to a hopeful interpretation—accurate
and high-quality information can bridge gaps between ideologically divided communities of
voters. It also contrasts with other settings in which new information about the performance
of a party further polarizes voters because supporters of the party disfavored by the new
information do not believe it. In our case, this seems not to have happened either online or
in the field. It is worth noting, however, that this pattern does not mean that the credibility
of the information and how and by whom it was delivered are unimportant. On the contrary,
the fact that non-affiliated canvassers had bigger (even if typically statistically significant)
impacts suggests that credibility still matters, and our interpretation of this heterogeneous
effectisthatgovernmentsupporterswerelesslikelytobeswayedwhentheinformationabout
the state of institutions came from canvassers affiliated with the opposition parties.
7 Conclusion
The last two decades have witnessed increasing resilience and durability of several author-
itarian regimes around the world, in stark contrast to perspectives rooted in the “end of
history” predicting the “the end point of mankind’s ideological evolution and the univer-
salization of Western liberal democracy as the final form of human government”—or more
simply, thevictoryofliberalcapitalism(e.g., Fukuyama[1989],Sen[1999]). Accordingtothe
Freedom House, every year since 2006 the number of countries moving away from democracy
around the world has exceeded the number of those improving their democratic institutions
(Freedom House [2023]). Social science is still at a loss in explaining these sweeping trends.
25Appendix Figure A-11 shows ITT estimates separately for the research-based and basic informational
treatments.
26

Two sets of ideas have emerged as popular bookends in these debates. The first claims
that many cultures around the world do not value democracy and hence their peoples do not
demand, or at the very least do not fight for, democratic institutions (e.g., Gessen [2017],
Huntington [1997], Mitter and Johnson [2021]). The second instead sees the durability of
authoritarian regimes in their ability to use propaganda, misinformation and social control
(e.g., Esberg [2021], Guriev and Treisman [2022], King et al. [2013], McMillan and Zoido
[2002]). Related to this second perspective, citizens under authoritarian regimes may be
discouraged from participation or may simply lose interest in politics (e.g., Croke et al.
[2016], Chen and Yang [2019]). Despite growing interest and a blossoming literature in this
area, we are far from a comprehensive understanding of these issues.
In this paper, we study these questions in the context of the historic May 2023 election
in Tu¨rkiye, taking place under the shadow of growing authoritarianism of President Recep
Tayyip Erdog˜an and his AKP Party. We designed an online experiment and a large-scale
field experiment, where Turkish voters were presented with accurate information on how
democracy and media freedom have evolved in the country and their role in dealing with
natural resource disasters and corruption—two issues that were top of mind for Turkish
citizens in 2023. We document that, before experiment, the majority of the supporters
of the governing coalition had major misperceptions about these issues—they considered
Tu¨rkiye to be more democratic and to have a more free and independent media than it did
in practice (compared to V-DEM scores), and they systematically underestimated the value
of democracy and free media in combating natural disasters and corruption (compared to
the general consensus in the research literature).
Against this background, if the information we provided turned out to be disregarded by
Turkish voters, this would be evidence that they do not care about democratic institutions
or have been firmly convinced by propaganda that either Turkish institutions are sufficiently
democratic or there is not much to gain from greater democracy or media freedom. In the
event, we found the opposite. Online, the informational treatment had a large effect on be-
liefs about the state of democracy and media freedom in Tu¨rkiye and their utility, as well as
an equally large impact on voting intentions—increasing the likelihood of individuals in our
treatment group voting for the more pro-democracy opposition coalition by 3.7 percentage
points (6.2 percent relative to the control mean). In our field experiment, which included
about 50 percent of 885,000 registered voters in the third-largest city of Tu¨rkiye, the infor-
mational treatment at the neighborhood level increased the fraction of the electorate voting
for the opposition by a 2.2 percentage points (4.1 percent relative to the control mean).
Our online experiment also enabled us to show that voters responded to actual information
rather than to experimenter demand effects.
27

Equally remarkable are our results on mechanisms. One may be worried that this type
of information may further polarize the electorate and any benefits come from mobilizing
voters that were already leaning towards the opposition—or were for other reasons critical of
the government. We found the opposite. There are no aggregate turnout effects, and more
importantly, our results are mostly explained by the responses of voters that have more
misperceived beliefs and by votes in neighborhoods leaning towards the governing coalition.
Our results are consistent with the notion that the credibility of the information matters,
sincewefindthatthesameinformationprovidedbynon-affiliated(independent)canvassersis
moreeffective. Thissuggeststhataccurateinformationthatisimpartiallypresentedcanhave
an impact on voters that have lived for an extended period under an authoritarian regime
and can even influence those that are broadly supportive of the authoritarian government.
Our results raise several additional questions that are ripe for future research. Here we
list a few of them.
• Future work can investigate more systematically when new information will have a po-
larizingimpactandwhenitwillbeacceptedbyeventhosewhoaregenerallysupportive
of the party that is disfavored by this information.
• It would also be interesting to investigate what types of misperceptions can be in-
fluenced by accurate information and whether there are dimensions of ideology and
beliefs that are immune to new information. In this context, it may be particularly in-
teresting to distinguish between information from one’s own social network, from social
media, from traditional media, and from parties and politicians. For each source, one
could investigate whether it has typically contributed disproportionately to mispercep-
tions and whether it can effectively correct misperceptions when it provides accurate
information.
• Another interesting area is to explore whether information-political support feedbacks
can lead to self-fulfilling traps—for example, authoritarian governments convincing
their voters that democracy is not for them and this in turn making authoritarian
governments more stable and democracy less likely to take root. Further study of what
types of interventions and shocks can break such traps would also be an interesting
direction.
• It would be very useful to develop theoretical models that can help us understand the
patterns we are seeing in our study and more generally help us integrate this type of
evidence with existing and new theoretical frameworks in the literature.
28

• Another set of interesting questions is whether new and credible information can have
durable effects (which our results suggest may be the case based on voting patterns
in the municipal elections one year after our experiment) and whether they may build
realistic or overoptimistic aspirations about what democracy can deliver.
• Several other directions on why democracy has been in retreat around the world and
the role of better information and different political strategies in reversing this trend
are additional important areas for research.
29

Figure 1: Evolution of Democracy in Tu¨rkiye
A. Evolution of V-DEM Democratic Score
detaerc
si PKA
retsiniM
emirP
semoceb
nağodrE
2202
sv
0002
:ecnereffiD
70
60
50
40
30
1990 2000 2010 2020
B. Evolution of V-DEM Democratic Score Components
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Average Electoral Liberal
Participatory Deliberative Egalitarian
Notes: ThisfigureplotstheevolutionofdemocracyscoresinTu¨rkiyebetween1990and2022,from
the V-DEM data set. Panel A displays the composite democracy index, which is the average of five
indicesmeasuringdifferentdimensionsofdemocracy,electoral,liberal,participatory,deliberativeand
egalitarian. This composite index is also the one used in Acemoglu et al. [2024], where more details
canbefound. PanelBpresentstheevolutionofthefivedimensionsofdemocracyseparately.
30

Figure 2: Baseline Institutional Views
A. Perceived Valuation of Institutions
Autocracy Sometimes Preferable Valuation of Institutions (Control Group)
7 7
6 6
5 5
4 4
3 3
2 2
1 1
Didn't vote People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP Didn't vote People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP
B. Perceived and Real Change in State of Institutions Between 2000 and April-May, 2023
Media Democracy
40 40
20 20
0
0
-20
-20
Actual (V-DEM)
-40 Actual (V-DEM)
-40
Didn't vote People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP Didn't vote People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP
Notes: This figure presents baseline views of participants in the online experiment by political affiliation (People’s Alliance,
Nation Alliance, HDP supporters, and non-voters). Affiliations are on the basis of self-reported votes in the 2018 election.
PanelAshows,ontheleft,theextenttowhichindividualsupportauthoritariangovernments,andontheright,ourValuation
of Institutions variable,whichmeasurestheextenttowhichindividualsbelievethatdemocraticinstitutionsareimportantfor
achieving better outcomes. For this latter variable, we restrict the sample to individuals in the control group to ensure that
the patterns are not impacted by our treatments. Panel B measures perceptions about how respondents think media (on the
left) and democracy (on the right) have evolved between 2000 and 2023. The dashed line indicates the actual change from
theV-DEMdataset. Thewhiskersshow95percentconfidenceintervals. Formoredetailsonvariablesandmeasurement,see
AppendixTableA-1.
31

Figure 3: Treatment Effects on Beliefs and Voting Outcomes in the Online
Experiment
A. Beliefs
Valuation of Institutions State of Institutions
2.9 1.7
2.8 1.6
p=0.00 p=0.07 p=0.02
p=0.01
2.7 p=0.04 p=0.08 p=0.08 1.5 p=0.01 p=0.23
p=0.70
p=0.11
2.6 p=0.71 p=0.98 p=0.54 1.4 p=0.00 p=0.00 p=0.02 p=0.00
2.5 1.3
2.4 1.2
Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment
Control Bundled Media Democracy Control Bundled Media Democracy
B. Voting Outcomes
Vote for the Opposition Turnout
p=0.41 p=0.02
0.75 p=0.33
1.00 p=0.37 p=0.92 p=0.85 p=0.30 p=0.20 p=0.30
0.70
p=0.00 0.95
p=0.00 p=0.01
0.65 p=0.00
p=0.00 p=0.00
0.90
p=0.60 p=0.69 p=0.62
0.60
0.85
0.55 0.80
0.50 0.75
Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment
Control Bundled Media Democracy Control Bundled Media Democracy
Notes: This figure summarizes the main results from the online experiment. It presents estimates of the informational
treatments on voter beliefs in Panel A and self-reported voting intentions in Panel B. Valuation of Institutions measure
the extent to which individuals believe that democratic institutions are important for achieving better outcomes, and State
of Institutions measures perceptions of how democratic institutions have evolved between 2000 and 2023 in Tu¨rkiye. Both
variablesareinstandarddeviationunits. Vote for the Opposition andTurnout aredummyvariablesforvoterintentions. The
differencebetweentheheightsofthebarsforthetreatmentandcontrolgroupsprovidesourbaselineestimatesoftheeffectof
theinformationaltreatments, correspondingtotheestimatesofequation(1)inthetext. Estimatesarebasedonourbaseline
specificationthatincludesthefullsetofpre-treatmentvariableslistedinAppendixTableA-3ascontrols. Thewhiskersshow
95percentconfidenceintervals,whilethep-valuesontopofthebarsareforthesedifferencesbeingstatisticallydifferentfrom
zero. Thep-valuesattheverytoparefortheinformationaltreatmentbeingstatisticallydifferentfromtheplacebo. Formore
detailsonvariablesandmeasurement,seeAppendixTableA-1.
32

Figure 4: Treatment Effects on Voting Outcomes in the Field Experiment
A. Opposition’s Vote Share (2023 Election) B. Voter Turnout (2023 Election) C. Opposition’s Vote Share (2024 Election)
Presidential First Presidential Second Parliamentary Presidential First Presidential Second Parliamentary Municipal 2024
0.62 0.92 0.62
p=0.03
p=0.03
0.59 0.89 0.59
p=0.73
p=0.02
p=0.91
p=0.02
0.56 0.86 p=0.81 0.56
0.53 0.83 0.53
0.50 0.80 0.50
Control Treatment Control Treatment Control Treatment
Notes: This figure summarizes the main results from the field experiment. It presents ballot box-level estimates of the treatment effects on the opposition’s vote share and
turnoutinthe2023firstandsecondroundpresidential,andparliamentaryelectionsinPanelsAandB,andtheopposition’svoteshareinthe2024municipalelectioninPanel
C. In this figure, we focus on the bundled treatment, which is a dummy variable for either to research-based or the basic informational treatment at the neighborhood level.
Thedifferencebetweentheheightsofthebarsfortreatmentandcontrolgroupsgivesourbaselineestimatesoftheeffectoftheinformationaltreatments,correspondingtothe
ITT estimates of equation (2) in the text. Estimates are based on our baseline specification, which includes as controls the number of registered voters at each ballot box in
2023; ballot-box geographic controls (population density, precipitation, temperature, ruggedness, distance to I˙stanbul, and distance to the coast); neighborhood-level controls
fromthe2018parliamentaryelection(opposition’svoteshare,turnout,andnumberofregisteredvoters);aswellasdummiesfordifferentregionsandstratafixedeffects. The
whiskersshow95percentconfidenceintervals,whilethep-valuesontopofthebarsareforthesedifferencesbeingstatisticallydifferentfromzero. Formoredetailsonvariables
andmeasurement,seeAppendixTableA-1.
33

Figure 5: Unbundled Treatment Effects on Voting Outcomes in the Field Experiment
A. Presidential First B. Presidential Second C. Parliamentary
0.63
p=0.33 p=0.37
p=0.76
p=0.52
0.61 p=0.09 p=0.08
p=0.09 p=0.10 p=0.56 p=0.03 p=0.06 p=0.17 p=0.03
0.59 p=0.20 p=0.47
p=0.62
p=0.04
0.57 p=0.06 p=0.12 p=0.02
p=0.68
0.55
0.53
Research-base dBasic Non-affiliated İYİ CHP Research-base d Basic Non-affiliated İYİ CHP Research-base d Basic Non-affiliated İYİ CHP
Control Research-based vs Basic Canvasser Affiliation Control Research-based vs Basic Canvasser Affiliation Control Research-based vs Basic Canvasser Affiliation
Notes: This figure shows results from the field experiment, separately for the research-based and basic informational treatments and also the affiliation of the canvassers.
It presents ballot box-level estimates of the treatment effects on the opposition’s vote share in the 2023 first- and second-round presidential elections, as well as the 2023
parliamentaryelections,inPanelsA,B,andC,respectively. Thedifferencebetweentheheightsofthebarsfortreatmentandcontrolgroupsgivesourbaselineestimatesofthe
effectofthedifferentinformationaltreatments,correspondingtotheITTestimatesofequation(2)inthetext. Estimatesarebasedonourbaselinespecification,whichincludes
as controls the number of registered voters at each ballot box in 2023; ballot-box geographic controls (population density, precipitation, temperature, ruggedness, distance to
I˙stanbul, and distance to the coast); neighborhood-level controls from the 2018 parliamentary election (opposition’s vote share, turnout, and number of registered voters); as
wellasdummiesfordifferentregionsandstratafixedeffects. Thewhiskersshow95percentconfidenceintervals,whilethep-valuesontopofthebarsareforthesedifferences
beingstatisticallydifferentfromzero. Thep-valuesattheverytoparefortheresearch-basedandbasicinformationaltreatmentsandtheeffectsfromcanvassingwithdifferent
affiliationsbeingstatisticallydifferent. Formoredetailsonvariablesandmeasurement,seeAppendixTableA-1.
34

Figure 6: Online Experiment Results Are Driven by Individuals Who Did Not
Previously Believe Institutions Worsened between 2000 and 2023
A. Underestimate Deterioration in State of Institutions at Baseline
Vote for the Opposition Valuation of Institutions State of Institutions
0.40 2.5 2.5
p=0.00
0.35
p=0.00 2.3 p=0.00 2.3 p=0.29
0.30 p=0.00 p=0.15 p=0.00
2.1 2.1
p=0.37
0.25 p=0.02
1.9 1.9
0.20
0.15 1.7 1.7
Control Placebo Treatment Control Placebo Treatment Control Placebo Treatment
B. Overestimate Deterioration in State of Institutions at Baseline
Vote for the Opposition Valuation of Institutions State of Institutions
3.4 1.1
1.00
p=0.33
p=0.43
p=0.61
0.95 p=0.19 3.2 p=0.53 p=0.20 0.9
p=0.94
0.90 p=0.27 p=0.25
3.0 0.7
0.85
2.8 0.5
0.80
0.75 2.6 0.3
Control Placebo Treatment Control Placebo Treatment Control Placebo Treatment
Notes: Thisfigureplotstreatmenteffectsintheonlineexperimentseparatelyforrespondentswhounderestimatethedeterio-
rationinthestateofinstitutionsatbaseline(PanelA)andthosewhoaccuratelyestimate(oroverestimate)thedeterioration
the deterioration in the state of institutions at baseline (Panel B). We define these two groups as the participants that are,
respectively, below and above the median of the relevant variables. We show separately control means, placebo effects and
informational treatment effects on self-reported intention to vote for the opposition, valuation of institutions and perceived
change in state of institutions. Valuation of Institutions measure the extent to which individuals believe that democratic
institutions are important for achieving better outcomes, and State of Institutions measures perceptions of how democratic
institutions have evolved in Tu¨rkiye. These perception variables are in standard deviation units. The difference between the
heightsofthebarsfortreatmentandcontrolgroupsgivesourbaselineestimatesoftheeffectoftheinformationaltreatments,
correspondingtoestimatesofequation(1)inthetext. Estimatesarebasedonourbaselinespecificationthatincludesthefull
setofpre-treatmentvariableslistedinAppendixTableA-3ascontrols. Thewhiskersshow95percentconfidenceintervals,while
thep-valuesontopofthebarsareforthesedifferencesbeingstatisticallydifferentfromzero. Thep-valuesattheverytopare
fortheinformationaltreatmentbeingstatisticallydifferentfromtheplacebo. Formoredetailsonvariablesandmeasurement,
seeAppendixTableA-1.
35

Figure 7: Field Experiment Results Are Driven by Neighborhoods Previously
Against the Opposition
A. Neighborhoods with Below Median Opposition’s Vote Share in 2018
Presidential First Presidential Second Parliamentary
0.55
p=0.04
p=0.06
0.53
0.51
p=0.02
0.49
0.47
0.45
Control Treatment
B. Neighborhoods with Above Median Opposition’s Vote Share in 2018
Presidential First Presidential Second Parliamentary
0.66
p=0.30
p=0.27
0.64
0.62
p=0.30
0.60
0.58
0.56
Control Treatment
Notes: The figure plots treatment effects in the field experiment separately for neighborhoods below (Panel A) and above
(Panel B) the median of the opposition’s vote share in the 2018 parliamentary election. Each panel presents ballot box-level
estimatesofthetreatmenteffectsontheopposition’svoteshareinthe2023first-andsecond-roundpresidentialelections,aswell
asthe2023parliamentaryelections. Inthisfigure,wefocusonthebundledtreatment,whichisadummyvariableforeitherto
research-basedorthebasicinformationaltreatmentattheneighborhoodlevel. Thedifferencebetweentheheightsofthebarsfor
treatmentandcontrolgroupsgivesourbaselineestimatesoftheeffectoftheinformationaltreatments,correspondingtotheITT
estimatesofequation(2)inthetext. Estimatesarebasedonourbaselinespecification,whichincludesascontrolsthenumber
ofregisteredvotersateachballotboxin2023; ballot-boxgeographiccontrols(populationdensity,precipitation,temperature,
ruggedness,distancetoI˙stanbul,anddistancetothecoast);neighborhood-levelcontrolsfromthe2018parliamentaryelection
(opposition’s vote share, turnout, and number of registered voters); as well as dummies for different regions and strata fixed
effects. Thewhiskersshow95percentconfidenceintervals,whilethep-valuesontopofthebarsareforthesedifferencesbeing
statisticallydifferentfromzero. Formoredetailsonvariablesandmeasurement,seeAppendixTableA-1.
36

Table 1: Bundled Treatment Effects in the Online Experiment with Different
Control Sets
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
A. Valuation of Institutions
Placebo 0.024 0.034 0.000 -0.009 -0.012
(0.042) (0.037) (0.031) (0.033) (0.032)
Treatment 0.097 0.106 0.080 0.062 0.065
(0.041) (0.037) (0.031) (0.033) (0.032)
Observations 4,232 4,182 4,007 3,614 3,614
Mean 2.556 2.556 2.556 2.556 2.556
p-value: Placebo=Treatment 0.032 0.014 0.002 0.007 0.003
B. State of Institutions
Placebo -0.060 -0.074 -0.048 -0.034 -0.028
(0.041) (0.022) (0.020) (0.021) (0.017)
Treatment -0.116 -0.107 -0.079 -0.071 -0.068
(0.041) (0.022) (0.020) (0.021) (0.018)
Observations 4,343 4,343 4,150 3,678 3,678
Mean 1.377 1.377 1.377 1.377 1.377
p-value: Placebo=Treatment 0.092 0.072 0.065 0.038 0.006
C. Vote for the Opposition
Placebo 0.025 0.009 0.005 0.006 0.005
(0.020) (0.015) (0.010) (0.010) (0.009)
Treatment 0.054 0.037 0.032 0.036 0.037
(0.020) (0.016) (0.010) (0.010) (0.009)
Observations 4,275 4,034 3,950 3,636 3,636
Mean 0.593 0.593 0.593 0.593 0.593
p-value: Placebo=Treatment 0.077 0.032 0.002 0.001 0.000
No controls Yes
Outcome at baseline Yes Yes Yes Yes
Imbalanced controls Yes Yes Yes
Full set of controls Yes
Notes: This table explores the robustness of our results from the online experiment to
differentsetsofcontrols. PanelsA,BandCpresentthetreatmenteffectsonValuationof
Institutions, State of Institutions and self-reported intention to vote for the opposition,
respectively. Column1includesnocontrols. Column2includesthepre-treatmentvalue
ofthedependentvariableasacontrol. Columns3and4additionallyincludethebaseline
variablesforwhichweobserveimbalancesinTableA-3at5%and10%level,respectively,
while Column 5 is based on our baseline specification that includes the full set of pre-
treatmentvariableslistedinAppendixTableA-3ascontrols. Thetablealsoreportsthe
number of observations, the mean of the dependent variable for the control group, and
the p-value for the placebo and informational treatments being equal. Standard errors
are robust to heteroskedasticity. For more details on variables and measurement, see
AppendixTableA-1.
37

Table 2: Bundled Treatment Effects in the Field Experiment with Different Control Sets
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
Presidential First Presidential Second Parliamentary Municipal 2024
A. Dependent Variable is Opposition’s Vote Share
Treatment 0.008 0.008 0.008 0.007 0.007 0.007 0.008 0.008 0.007 0.010 0.010 0.011
(0.008) (0.004) (0.003) (0.008) (0.004) (0.004) (0.007) (0.004) (0.003) (0.007) (0.005) (0.004)
Observations 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,840 2,840 2,840
Mean 0.548 0.548 0.548 0.582 0.582 0.582 0.579 0.579 0.579 0.556 0.556 0.556
B. Dependent Variable is Turnout
Treatment -0.001 -0.001 -0.001 -0.001 -0.000 -0.000 -0.001 -0.000 -0.000 -0.005 -0.004 -0.003
(0.003) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002) (0.002) (0.005) (0.005) (0.003)
Observations 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,840 2,840 2,840
Mean 0.878 0.878 0.878 0.853 0.853 0.853 0.867 0.867 0.867 0.781 0.781 0.781
Strata fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Outcome in 2018 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Full set of controls Yes Yes Yes Yes
Notes: Thistableexaminestherobustnessofourfieldexperimentresultstodifferentsetsofcontrols. Outcomesincludetheopposition’svoteshareandturnout,presentedinPanelsAand
B,respectively. Theresultsareshownforthe2023first-roundpresidentialelection(Columns1–3),the2023second-roundpresidentialelection(Columns4–6),the2023parliamentaryelection
(Columns7–9),andthe2024municipalelections(Columns10–12). TheestimatesarebasedonITTestimatesofequation(2)inthetext. Columns1,4,7,and10includeonlystratafixed
effectsascontrols. Columns2,5,8,and11includestratafixedeffectsandtheoutcomeinthepre-treatmentperiodattheneighborhoodlevelascontrols,whichiseitherthe2018opposition’s
parliamentaryvoteshareorturnoutinthe2018presidentialelectioninPanelsAandB,respectively. Columns3,6,9,and12arebasedonourbaselinespecification,whichincludesascontrols
thenumberofregisteredvotersateachballotboxin2023;ballot-boxgeographiccontrols(populationdensity,precipitation,temperature,ruggedness,distancetoI˙stanbul,anddistancetothe
coast);neighborhood-levelcontrolsfromthe2018parliamentaryelection(opposition’svoteshare,turnout,andnumberofregisteredvoters);aswellasdummiesfordifferentregionsandstrata
fixedeffects. Thetablealsoreportsthenumberofobservationsandthemeanofthedependentvariableforthecontrolgroup. Standarderrorsareclusteredattheneighborhoodlevelandare
robusttoheteroskedasticity. Formoredetailsonvariablesandmeasurement,seeAppendixTableA-1.
38

References
Daron Acemoglu, Ali Cheema, Asim I. Khwaja, and James A. Robinson. Trust in state
and nonstate actors: Evidence from dispute resolution in Pakistan. Journal of Political
Economy, 128(8):3090–3147, 2020.
Daron Acemoglu, Nicolas Ajzenman, Cevat Giray Aksoy, Martin Fiszbein, and Carlos
Molina. (Successful) democracies breed their own support. Review of Economic Stud-
ies, 2024.
¨
Daron Acemoglu and E. Murat U¸cer. High-quality versus low-quality growth in Turkey:
Causes and consequences. CEPR Discussion Paper Series, (14070), 2019.
Maja Adena, Ruben Enikolopov, Maria Petrova, Veronica Santarosa, and Ekaterina Zhu-
ravskaya. Radio and the rise of the Nazis in prewar Germany. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 130(4):1885–1939, 2015.
Kevin Arceneaux and Robin Kolodny. Educating the least informed: Group endorsements
in a grassroots campaign. American Journal of Political Science, 53(4):755–770, 2009.
Eric Arias, Horacio Larreguy, John Marshall, and Pablo Querub´ın. Priors Rule: When
Do Malfeasance Revelations Help Or Hurt Incumbent Parties? Journal of the European
Economic Association, 20(4):1433–1477, 2022.
Lonna Rae Atkeson. Sure, i voted for the winner! overreport of the primary vote for the
party nominee in the national election studies. Political Behavior, 21(3):197–215, 1999.
MichaelA.Bailey, DanielJ.Hopkins, andToddRogers. Unresponsiveandunpersuaded: The
unintended consequences of a voter persuasion effort. Political Behavior, 38(3):713–746,
September 2016.
Abhijit Banerjee, Sylvain Chassang, and Erik Snowberg. Decision theoretic approaches to
experiment design and external validity. In Handbook of Economic Field Experiments,
volume 1, pages 141–174. 2017.
Ceren Baysan. Persistent polarizing effects of persuasion: Experimental evidence from
Turkey. American Economic Review, 112(11):3528–3546, 2022.
Timothy Besley and Robin Burgess. The political economy of government responsiveness:
Theory and evidence from India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4):1415–1451,
2002.
39

Timothy Besley and Torsten Persson. Democratic values and institutions. American Eco-
nomic Review: Insights, 1(1):59–76, 2019.
Aymo Brunetti and Beatrice Weder. A free press is bad news for corruption. Journal of
Public Economics, 87(7):1801–1824, 2003.
Michael A. Callen, Jonathan L. Weigel, and Noam Yuchtman. Experiments about institu-
tions. Annual Review of Economics, 16(1):105–131, aug 2024.
James E. Campbell. Explaining politics, not polls: Reexamining macropartisanship with
recalibrated nes data. Public Opinion Quarterly, 74(4):616–642, 2010.
Yiming Cao. Audit of god: Hometown connections and building damage in the Sichuan
Earthquake. Working Paper, 2024.
Emily Arthur Cardy. An experimental field study of the gotv and persuasion effects of
partisan direct mail and phone calls. The Annals of the American Academy of Political
and Social Science, 601(1):28–40, 2005.
Yuyu Chen and David Y. Yang. The impact of media censorship: 1984 or brave new world?
American Economic Review, 109(6):2294–2332, 2019.
Albert Chong, Ana L. De La O, Dean Karlan, and Leonard Wantchekon. Does corruption
information inspire the fight or quash the hope? A field experiment in Mexico on voter
turnout, choice, and party identification. Journal of Politics, 77(1):55–71, 2015.
Alexander Coppock and Donald P. Green. Is voting habit forming? New evidence from
experiments and regression discontinuities. American Journal of Political Science, 60(4):
1044–1062, 2016.
Kevin Croke, Guy Grossman, Horacio Larreguy, and John Marshall. Deliberate disen-
gagement: How education can decrease political participation in electoral authoritarian
regimes. American Political Science Review, 110(3):579–600, 2016.
Cesi Cruz, Philip Keefer, and Julien Labonne. Buying informed voters: New effects of
information on voters and candidates. The Economic Journal, 131(635):1105–1134, 09
2020.
Cesi Cruz, Philip Keefer, Julien Labonne, and Francesco Trebbi. Making policies matter:
Voter responses to campaign promises. The Economic Journal, 134(661):1875–1913, 01
2024a.
40

Cesi Cruz, Julien Labonne, and Francesco Trebbi. Campaigning against populism: Emotions
and information in real election campaigns. CEPR Discussion Paper, 2024b.
Sirianne Dahlum, Torbjørn Hanson, Ashild Johnsen, Andreas Kotsadam, and Alexander
Wuttke. Is support for authoritarian rule contagious? Evidence from field and survey
experiments. Working Paper, 2024.
StefanoDellaVignaandMatthewGentzkow. Persuasion: Empiricalevidence. Annual Review
of Economics, 2:643–669, 2010.
Thad Dunning, Guy Grossman, Macartan Humphreys, Susan D. Hyde, Craig McIntosh,
Gareth Nellis, Claire L. Adida, Eric Arias, Clara Bicalho, Taylor C. Boas, Mark T. Bun-
taine, SimonChauchard, AnirvanChowdhury, JessicaGottlieb, F.DanielHidalgo, Marcus
Holmlund, Ryan Jablonski, Eric Kramon, Horacio Larreguy, Malte Lierl, John Marshall,
Gwyneth McClendon, Marcus A. Melo, Daniel L. Nielson, Paula M. Pickering, Melina R.
Platas, Pablo Querub´ın, Pia Raffler, and Neelanjan Sircar. Voter information campaigns
and political accountability: Cumulative findings from a preregistered meta-analysis of
coordinated trials. Science Advances, 5(7), 2019.
Ruben Enikolopov, Maria Petrova, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. Media and political persua-
sion: Evidence from Russia. American Economic Review, 101(7):3253–85, 2011.
Ruben Enikolopov, Michael Rochlitz, Koen J. L. Schoors, and Nikita Zakharov. The effect
of independent online media in an autocracy. SSRN Working Paper, 2023.
Jos´e Ramo´n Enr´ıquez, Horacio Larreguy, John Marshall, and Alberto Simpser. Mass Po-
litical Information on Social Media: Facebook Ads, Electorate Saturation, and Electoral
Accountability in Mexico. Journal of the European Economic Association, 22(4):1678–
1722, 02 2024.
Jane Esberg. Anticipating dissent: The repression of politicians in Pinochet’s Chile. The
Journal of Politics, 83(2):689–705, 2021.
Claudio Ferraz and Frederico Finan. Exposing corrupt politicians: The effects of Brazil’s
publicly released audits on electoral outcomes. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2):
703–745, 2008.
Steven Finkel, Anja Neundorf, and Ericka Ram´ırez. Can online civic education induce
democratic citizenship? Experimental evidence from a new democracy. American Journal
of Political Science, 68(2):613–630, 2024.
41

Freedom House. Freedom in the world 2023: Marking 50 years in the struggle for democracy.
Technical report, 2023.
Freedom House. Freedom in the world: The mounting damage of flawed elections and armed
conflict. Technical report, 2024.
NicolaFuchs-SchundelnandMatthiasSchundeln. Ontheendogeneityofpoliticalpreferences:
Evidence from individual experience with democracy. Science, 347(6226):1145–1148, 2015.
Thomas Fujiwara, Kyle Meng, and Tom Vogl. Habit formation in voting: Evidence from
rainy elections. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(4):160–188, 2016.
Francis Fukuyama. The end of history? The National Interest, 16:3–18, 1989.
Andrew Gelman, Sharad Goel, Douglas Rivers, and David Rothschild. The mythical swing
voter. Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 11(1):103–130, 2016.
Masha Gessen. The Future Is History: How Totalitarianism Reclaimed Russia. Riverhead
Books, 2017.
Matthew H. Graham and Milan W. Svolik. Democracy in America? Partisanship, polariza-
tion, and the robustness of support for democracy in the United States. American Political
Science Review, 114(2):392–409, 2020.
Sergei Guriev and Daniel Treisman. Spin Dictators: The Changing Face of Tyranny in the
21st Century. Princeton University Press, 2022.
Samuel P. Huntington. The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order. Simon
and Schuster, 1997.
Matthew E. Kahn. The death toll from natural disasters: The role of income, geography,
and institutions. Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(2):271–284, 2005.
Chad Kendall, Tommaso Nannicini, and Francesco Trebbi. How do voters respond to in-
formation? evidence from a randomized campaign. American Economic Review, 105(1):
322–353, 2015.
Gary King, Jennifer Pan, and Margaret E. Roberts. How censorship in China allows govern-
ment criticism but silences collective expression. American Political Science Review, 107
(2):326–343, 2013.
42

Brian Knight and Ana Tribin. Opposition media, state censorship, and political account-
ability: Evidence from Chavez’s Venezuela. The World Bank Economic Review, 36(2):
455–487, 2022.
Horacio Larreguy, John Marshall, and Jr. Snyder, James M. Publicising Malfeasance: When
the Local Media Structure Facilitates Electoral Accountability in Mexico. The Economic
Journal, 130(631):2291–2327, 05 2020.
John McMillan and Pablo Zoido. How to subvert democracy: Montesinos in Peru. Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 18(4):69–92, 2002.
Rana Mitter and Elsbeth Johnson. What the West gets wrong about China: Three funda-
mental misconceptions. Harvard Business Review, 2021.
Leonid Peisakhin and Arturas Rozenas. Electoral effects of biased media: Russian television
in Ukraine. American Journal of Political Science, 62(3):535–550, 2018.
Torsten Persson and Guido Tabellini. Democratic capital: The nexus of political and eco-
nomic change. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(2):88–126, 2009.
Vincent Pons. Will a five-minute discussion change your mind? A countrywide experiment
on voter choice in France. American Economic Review, 108(6), 2018.
Eduardo Rivera, Enrique Seira, and Saumitra Jha. Democracy corrupted: Apex corruption
and the erosion of democratic values. Stanford University Graduate School of Business
Working Paper Series, 4166, 2024.
Amartya Sen. Development as Freedom. Oxford University Press, 1999.
Milan W. Svolik. Voting against autocracy. World Politics, 75(4):647–691, 2023.
Gerald C. Wright. Errors in measuring vote choice in the national election studies, 1952–88.
American Journal of Political Science, 37:291–316, 1993.
43

A Appendix
Figure A-1: Experimental Design Online Experiment
Recruitment Using Facebook Ads (April-May 2023)
(N=8,429 clicked ads and started survey)
Baseline Questions (N=5,161)
-Block 1: Socio-demographic characteristics
-Block 2: Social views
-Block 3: Performance of institutions
-Block 4: Political Ideology
Placebo Control Treatment
(40%) (20%) (40%)
Media Democracy Media Democracy
Endline Questions (N=4,405)
-Block 5: Institutions and their changes in Tu¨rkiye
-Block 6: Final questions
Notes: This figure shows the experimental design of the study. A total of 19,151 individuals clicked on the ads and were
redirected to the survey landing page, where they reviewed the consent form. Of these, 8,429 proceeded to start the survey.
A total of 5,161 respondents completed the baseline survey and were then randomly assigned to two treatment groups, two
placebogroups,andacontrolgroup. Intotal,4,405participantscompletedthesurvey,comprisingourfinalsampleforanalysis.
A-1

Figure A-2: Differential Attrition by Treatment Arms – Online Experiment
0.90
0.85
p=0.59
p=0.92 p=0.50
p=0.17
0.80 p=0.43 p=0.38 p=0.40 p=0.50
p=1.00
0.75
0.70
Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment
Control Bundled Media Democracy
Notes: This figure shows the differences in survey completion among individuals assigned to different
treatment arms. See equation (1). The outcome is a dummy that takes the value of one if the participant
didnotcompletethesurvey. Eachbardisplaysthemeanoftheoutcomeforeachofthesegroupsasindicated
on the horizontal axis. The whiskers show 95 percent confidence intervals, while the p-values on top of the
bars are for these differences being statistically different from zero. The p-values at the very top are for
the informational treatment being statistically different from the placebo. For more details on variables and
measurement, see Appendix Table A-1.
A-2

Figure A-3: Pamphlets in the Field Experiment
A. Research-based Pamphlet for Non-affiliated B. Basic Pamphlet for Non-affiliated
CORRUPTION
INDEPENDENT Impartial and independent media play a vital
MEDIA role in democracies.
a i R n c e d c s e u e p r a e a r n t c e d h i e e n n r f s t o m r s m t e a a d t t e i i a o t n h a a r t e t o u c t n h ri b e ti i c p a a s u l e b i d n li c a p . n ro d v iding WHAT IS Y M O A U Y R 1 4 C ? HOICE ON WHAT IS Y M O A U Y R 1 4 C ? HOICE ON
One b o i f g T g ü e r s k t i ye's LET'S FIGHT
problems is corruption. FOR A
CORRUPTION i R n e d s e e p a e r n c d h e e n rs c e s t w at o e r s th e a n t s a , s c o m rr e u d p ia ti on Transparency and STRONGER
increases. accountability are the DEMOCRACY.
foundation for a better
future.
When the media does not report on
corruption, real and accurate information is Say no to corruption,
h h i i d d e d e c n o r fr r o u m pt i t o h n e . public, making it easier to look to th h e o p fu e t . ure with
To fight corruption,
LET'S FIGHT today c is h a th n e g e ti . me for
To Contribute to CORRUPTION To Contribute to
Democracy TOGETHER, Be o c u o r m d e e a m p a a n r d t n fo er r in Democracy
LET'S MAKE tran T s ü p r a k r i e y n e c . y in
TÜRKİYE
indep O e ff n ic d i e a n l c d e a t h a a s v h e o d w e c th lin at e d m r e a d p ia id n ly e u in tr T a ü lit r y k i a y n e d in the STRONG. dem L o e c t r ' a s c p y r o to te g c e t t her.
last 30 years.
At the same time, corruption has increased signicantly. This brochure has been prepared by SahadaBiriz Volunteers. This brochure has been prepared by SahadaBiriz Volunteers.
Thank you for taking the time. Thank you for taking the time.
C. Research-based Pamphlet for CHP D. Basic Pamphlet for CHP
CORRUPTION
M IN E D D E I P A ENDENT r Im ol p e a i r n t i d a e l m an o d c r in a d c e ie p s e . ndent media play a vital OUR CHOICE OUR CHOICE
Researchers state that unbiased and THE NATION'S PRESIDENT THE NATION'S PRESIDENT
independent media are critical in providing
accurate information to the public.
KEMAL KILIÇDAROĞLU One b o i f g T g ü e r s k t i ye's LET'S FIGHT KEMAL KILIÇDAROĞLU
CORRUPTION Researchers state that as media problems is corruption. FOR A
i i n n d cr e e p a e s n e d s e . nce worsens, corruption A ac T c r o a u n n s t p a a b r i e li n ty c y a r a e n t d he D S E T M R O O C N R G A E C R Y. A
foundation for a
When the media does not report on LIBERATION better future. LIBERATION
corruption, real and accurate information is
h h i i d d e d e c n o r fr r o u m pt i t o h n e . public, making it easier to STORY Sa lo y o n k o t t o o t c h o e r f r u u t p u t r i e o n, STORY
with hope.
To fight
corruption, today
LET'S FIGHT is the time for
EPISODE 1: Corruption CORRUPTION change. EPISODE 1: Corruption
TOGETHER, Become a partner in
Official data show that media neutrality and For the Continuation of the Story LE S T T T Ü ' R S R O K M N İY A G E K . E t o r u a L n r e T s t d ' ü p s e r a m p k r r i e a y o n n e t c d e . y c f t o in r For the Continuation of the Story
independence have declined rapidly in democracy together.
Türkiye in the last 30 years.
At the same time, corruption has increased signicantly.
E. Research-based Pamphlet for I˙YI˙ Party F. Basic Pamphlet for I˙YI˙ Parti
CORRUPTION
M IN E D D E I P A ENDENT r Im ol p e a i r n t i d a e l m an o d c r in a d c e ie p s e . ndent media play a vital OUR CHOICE OUR CHOICE
Researchers state that unbiased and THE NATION'S PRESIDENT THE NATION'S PRESIDENT
independent media are critical in providing
accurate information to the public. KEMAL KILIÇDAROĞLU One b o i f g T g ü e r s k t i ye's LET'S FIGHT KEMAL KILIÇDAROĞLU
CORRUPTION i R n e d s e e p a e r n c d h e e n rs c e s t w at o e r s th e a n t s a , s c o m rr e u d p ia ti on pro T b r l a e n m s s p a is re c n o c r y r u a p n t d io n. STR FO O R N G A E R
increases. A accountability are the DEMOCRACY. A
foundation for a better
LIBERATION future. LIBERATION
i W c n o f h r o e r r u n m p t a t h i t o e io n m n , r e i e s d a i h l a i a d d n d o d e e n a s c f n r c o o u m t r a r e t t e h p e o r p t u o b n lic, STORY l S o a o y k n to o t t h o e c f o u r t r u u r p e t w io i n th , STORY
making it easier to hide corruption. hope.
To fight corruption,
LET'S FIGHT today c is h a th n e g e ti . me for
EPISODE 1: Corruption CORRUPTION Become a partner in EPISODE 1: Corruption
TOGETHER, our demand for
For the Continuation of the Story LET'S MAKE tran T s ü p r a k r i e y n e c . y in For the Continuation of the Story
TÜRKİYE Let's protect
Official data show that media neutrality and STRONG. democracy together.
independence have declined rapidly in
Türkiye in the last 30 years.
At the same time, corruption has increased signicantly.
A-3

Figure A-4: Alliance Vote Shares from Administrative Records and
Self-Reported Voting Data from the Online Experiment for the 2018 Election
Official
0.5
Online
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP Other
Notes: This figure compares the official alliance vote shares from the 2018 parliamentary election with self-
reported voting choices from our baseline survey. The comparison is presented in a color-coded bar chart:
yellow bars represent the People’s Alliance vote share, navy bars show the Nation Alliance vote share, and
grey bars indicate the vote shares for the HDP and other parties. For each alliance, the left bar reflects
the official 2018 election results, while the right bar shows the self-reported vote shares from the online
experiment.
A-4

Figure A-5: Additional Summary Statistics on Institutional Preferences by
Alliance Affiliation
Democracy Among All Forms of Government
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
Didn't vote People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP
Notes: This figure shows alternative measures of institutional value, categorized by political affiliation (People’s Alliance,
NationAlliance,HDPsupporters,andnon-voters). Itplotstheshareofindividualswhoresponded“Iwouldpreferdemocracy
among all forms of government.” The other answer options are, “In some cases, I may prefer an authoritarian government,”
and “For someone like me, it doesn’t matter whether the government is democratic or authoritarian.” The whiskers indicate
the95percentconfidenceintervals.
A-5