The Long-Run Effects of Psychotherapy on Depression,
Beliefs, and Economic Outcomes∗
Bhargav Bhat† Jonathan de Quidt Johannes Haushofer Vikram Patel
Gautam Rao Frank Schilbach Pierre-Luc Vautrey
January 31, 2023
Latest version available here
Abstract
We revisit two clinical trials that randomized depressed adults in India (n=775) to a brief course
of psychotherapy or a control condition. Four to five years later, the treatment group was 11
percentagepointslesslikelytobedepressedthanthecontrolgroup. Themoreeffectiveintervention
averted 9 months of depression on average over five years and cost only $66 per recipient. Therapy
hadbroaderimpactsbeyondmentalhealth,contributingtoamorerobustself-imageinthreeways.
First, it reduced participants’ likelihood of seeing themselves as a failure. Second, it reduced over-
optimisticbeliefupdatinginresponsetofeedbackaboutperformanceonanovelworktask,leading
to reduced overconfidence. Third, it increased self-assessed levels of patience and altruism. We
find no significant effects on employment or consumption, possibly because of other constraints on
employment in the largely female study sample.
∗We dedicate this paper to our coauthor Bhargav Bhat, who passed away during the course of this work. We thank
our entire field team in Goa for excellent research assistance, especially Siddhant Gokhale, Advait R. Aiyer, Gunjita
Gupta, and Anahita Karandikar. We thank our research managers at the Behavioral Development Lab, Adrien Pawlik,
and Erik Hausen. We thank Sejal Aggarwal, Maxwell Grozovsky, Ralph Ignacio Lawton, Zhangchi Ma, Kartik Vira,
HongyuanXia,andHaonanYeforresearchassistancewiththedataanalysis. WethankBenedictWeobongforhisearly
support of our project. We thank all our study participants for their time and patience. We received IRB approval
from Princeton. The experiment was pre-registered on the AEA registry, number AEARCTR-0003823. We gratefully
acknowledge funding from the Weiss Family Program Fund for Research in Development Economics, the Mind Brain
Behavior Initiative at Harvard, the Dean’s Fund at Harvard, the SHASS Research Fund at MIT, the Pershing Square
Venture Fund for Research on the Foundations of Human Behavior, and Princeton University. de Quidt acknowledges
financial support from Handelsbanken’s Research Foundations (grant BF17-0003).
†Bhat: Sangath; de Quidt: Institute for International Economic Studies, Stockholm University, CAGE, CEPR,
CESifo, ThReD (Jonathan.deQuidt@iies.su.se); Haushofer: Stockholm University (johannes.haushofer@ne.su.se); Patel:
Harvard and Sangath (Vikram_Patel@hms.harvard.edu); Rao: Harvard and NBER (grao@fas.harvard.edu); Schilbach:
MIT and NBER (fschilb@mit.edu) Vautrey: MIT (vautrey@mit.edu)

1 Introduction
Psychotherapy aims to treat psychological disorders by changing dysfunctional beliefs, thoughts,
and behaviors. It is effective in treating common mental health conditions such as depression—the
world’s leading cause of disability—and anxiety (WHO, 2017; Barth et al., 2016; Cuijpers et al., 2016).
Psychotherapy is widely used in high-income countries: nearly 10 percent of US adults received some
form of therapy from a mental-health professional in 2019 (Terlizzi and Zablotsky, 2020). Simplified
forms of psychotherapy have been developed to fill the enormous treatment gaps for mental illness in
low-income countries (Patel et al., 2009, 2018). Administered by trained non-specialists at low cost,
these therapies have been shown to cause sizable short-run improvements in mental health across a
variety of low-income settings (Singla et al., 2017).
We study the long-run effects of psychotherapy on mental health, behavioral, and economic out-
comes in a low-income setting. To do this, we revisited participants from two psychotherapy RCTs
in India, four to five years after the original trials were conducted. The first trial recruited depressed
individuals from the general population, while the second focused on perinatally depressed women.
We fill three gaps in the literature. First, we show that the effects of psychotherapy on depression
persist beyond the three to twelve months typically documented in the literature (Figure 1). In
particular, we believe our general population trial is the first long-run study of its kind.1 Second,
depression has long been linked to distorted self-directed beliefs, that psychotherapy seeks to correct
(Beck, 1967; Beck et al., 1979; de Quidt and Haushofer, 2016). We study how psychotherapy changes
these beliefs, and the processes by which they are formed, contributing to a “behavioral science” view
of its effects (Blattman, Jamison and Sheridan, 2017; Heller et al., 2017; Barker et al., 2022). Third,
we provide evidence of therapy’s long-run effects on economic outcomes.
In the original trials (described in Section 2), participants who had screened positive for depression
were randomized into receiving a brief course of psychotherapy, or to a control condition. Therapy was
delivered by non-specialist counselors and cost under $75 per recipient. The interventions primarily
employed“behavioralactivation,” teachingpatientstherelationshipbetweentheiractivitiesandmood,
and seeking to increase mood-improving activities. We successfully located and interviewed 76 percent
of participants—589 out of 775—from the two trials.2 In addition, to quantify the extent to which our
findings might shift existing scientific understanding, we asked 234 experts on economics and mental
health to forecast the main findings of the larger of the two trials via the Social Science Prediction
Platform (DellaVigna, Pope and Vivalt, 2019). Section 3 describes our empirical framework, pre-
analysis plan, and expert survey.
Section 4 analyzes the long-term effects of psychotherapy on mental health. On average across the
two trials, the brief courses of psychotherapy led to sustained reductions in depression. We measured
1 Inlow-andmiddle-incomecountrysettingsweknowofthreelong-runstudies,allofwhichfocusonspecialpopula-
tions. Baranov et al. (2020) and Maselko et al. (2020) study the effects of psychotherapy on perinatal depression seven
andthreeyearsaftertreatment,respectively,inprogramsverycloselyrelatedtooursecondtrial. Blattmanetal.(2022)
studyten-yearimpactsonasampleof“criminally-involvedyoungmen.” Perhapssurprisingly,therearealsofewlong-run
studiesoftherapyinhigh-incomecountries(Steinertetal.,2014). Manyofthosethatexisthavesmallsamples,combine
therapy with pharmacological treatment, or test against alternative forms of treatment rather than a control condition.
2Attrition and baseline characteristics are balanced across treatment and control groups for both trials, and our
follow-up samples are very similar on observables to the original trial samples.
1

symptomsofdepressionusingthePHQ-9questionnaire,astandardandlocally-validatedscreeningtool
alsoused intheoriginaltrials. Poolingthetwo trials, thetreatmentgrouphad 0.15 standarddeviation
(SD) lower PHQ-9 scores compared to the control group (p=0.08). Using standard diagnostic cutoffs
in PHQ-9 scores, we find 11 and 8 percentage points lower incidence of mild and moderate depression
in the treatment group, respectively (p<0.01 and p=0.03). Decomposing the PHQ-9 improvements,
we see significantly lower frequency of specific symptoms such as feeling bad about oneself and having
a poor appetite. Participants’ mood also improved, by 0.17 SD (p=0.04).
The long-run improvement in mental health is entirely driven by one of the two interventions: the
HealthyActivityProgram(HAP),whichdelivered6to8sessionsoftherapytoadultswithmoderately-
severe depression (N=495, Patel et al., 2017). The HAP intervention reduced depression symptoms
five years later by 0.23 SD (p=0.02) and incidence of mild and moderate depression by 13 percentage
points each (p<0.01). This effect equals the 91st percentile of the expert predictions, implying that
the vast majority (including mental-health professionals) underestimated the long-run mental health
impacts, despite being informed about the short-run effects. HAP was highly cost effective. Back-
of-the-envelope calculations suggest treated participants experienced 9 fewer months of depression
(defined as PHQ-9≥10), and gained the equivalent of 0.32 Quality-Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) over
the five years since enrollment. Even if we assumed all benefits vanish at that point, the implied cost
is a mere $7 per month of depression averted or $206 per QALY.3
Incontrast,theThinkingHealthyProgramPeer-Delivered(THPP)intervention—deliveredtopreg-
nantwomenwithmoderatelevelsofdepression(i.e.,lessseveredepressionthantheHAPsample)—had
no detectable long-run effect on depression (N=280). This finding is consistent with small short-run
effects reported in Fuhr et al. (2019) after our data collection began. This may be because the con-
trol group in the THPP trial shows high rates of spontaneous recovery, leaving little room for further
reductions in depression. Perinatal depression may be more likely than other kinds of depression to
exhibit remission due to its clearly circumscribed environmental trigger (pregnancy and childbirth).4
Maselko et al. (2020), evaluating an extended version of THPP, find very similar patterns of remission
in the control group, along with non-significant long-run impacts. Baranov et al. (2020) find much
lower rates of remission, and larger treatment effects (note that they evaluate THP, a more intensive
form of the program delivered by community health workers).
An important contributor to treatment gaps may be that potential beneficiaries do not expect
treatment to be effective. Section 5 investigates whether experience of therapy changes these beliefs.
We elicited participants’ incentivized quantitative beliefs about their program’s treatment effects, and
find that treated participants had significantly more positive beliefs about efficacy. This suggests
that increasing potential beneficiaries’ exposure to therapy might boost demand from the low levels
documented in the literature (Cronin, Forsstrom and Papageorge, 2020; Ridley et al., 2020; Sapiens
Lab, 2021). However, we find similar effects on perceived efficacy in both trials, despite differences in
3India does not have an official threshold for an intervention to be considered cost effective (Prinja, Sundararaman
and Muraleedharan, 2020). A common threshold (based on WHO-CHOICE guidance) is 1–3 times GDP per capita per
QALY, against which HAP compares very favorably (India’s GDP per capita was $1,438 when HAP was launched in
2013).
4Fuhretal.(2019)suggestthatthehighcontrol-groupremissionratemaybeduetolowerbaselinedepressionseverity
in the trial, although we find similar results if we apply the HAP screening criterion to the THPP sample.
2

realized efficacy. This could be because it is hard for patients to distinguish treatment effects from
spontaneous remission.
Next we turn to therapy’s effects on beliefs and preferences. Depression has long been linked to
pessimistic beliefs aboutoneself andhowone compares toothers (Beck, 1967;de Quidt andHaushofer,
2016). We designed our study to investigate how therapy causally changes these beliefs and the way
in which they are formed (Section 6). Such beliefs are important for economic decisions (Russo and
Schoemaker, 1992; Malmendier and Tate, 2005; Bénabou and Tirole, 2016), and over- and under-
confidence are widespread (Moore and Healy, 2008). Self-confidence may directly affect psychological
well-being (Köszegi, 2006), motivation (Bénabou and Tirole, 2002), and task performance (Schward-
mann and Van der Weele, 2019). An influential experimental literature studies how people “manage”
their self-confidence, trading off the benefits of higher self-confidence against the cost of inaccurate
beliefs. A common finding is asymmetrically optimistic belief updating, whereby “good” news receives
more weight than “bad” news.5
The expected effect of therapy on self-confidence is ambiguous. On the one hand, therapy seeks
to make patients see themselves in a more realistic light as having both strengths and weaknesses
(Beck et al., 1979; Beck, 2020). If therapy causes patients to have a more robust self-image, treated
participants might have a reduced psychological need for overconfidence in a specific domain (Blanton
et al., 2001; Sherman and Cohen, 2006; Kolubinski et al., 2018), leading to more accurate beliefs and
reducedoverconfidence. Ontheotherhand, aninfluentialliteratureon“depressiverealism” hasposited
that depression is associated with more realistic, less overconfident beliefs (Alloy and Abramson, 1979;
Alloy and Ahrens, 1987) (although the evidence is mixed (Moore and Fresco, 2012; Korn et al., 2013;
Dev et al., 2022)). In this view, psychotherapy might increase overconfidence.
We measure self-confidence using a lab-experimental paradigm developed by Mobius et al. (2021).
Participants complete a paid work task that mimics realistic jobs that might be available to them.
Then, we elicit their incentivized beliefs about an ego-relevant parameter: their performance relative
to others (specifically, their probability of ranking in the top half of a group of 10). We then give
them a sequence of noisy signals about their relative standing and re-elicit their beliefs each time. This
design allows us to measure the level of overconfidence, and compare belief-updating behavior against
a rational (Bayesian) benchmark.
The median expert predicted that control-group participants, who have high rates of depression,
would update their beliefs equally to positive and negative feedback—consistent with the idea of
depressive realism, and that therapy would shift people toward asymmetrically optimistic updating.
In contrast, we find substantial over-confidence and strongly optimistic belief updating in the control
group. In response to a positive signal, participants update by around 73 percent of the Bayesian
benchmark, but essentially ignore negative signals altogether. The treatment group start off equally
overconfident to the control group, but update their beliefs significantly less optimistically in response
to feedback, leading to significantly lower overconfidence by the end of the experiment.6 The point
5See, e.g., Eil and Rao (2011); Zimmermann (2020); Mobius et al. (2021); Coutts (2019); Buser, Gerhards and Van
Der Weele (2018); Ertac (2011). Not all studies find optimistic asymmetry, see Benjamin (2019).
6Thiscouldbeinterpretedasanincreasein“rationality” asaBayesianshouldrespondequallytopositiveandnegative
signals, but is also in some sense further from the Bayesian benchmark, since the treatment group becomes even more
3

estimates are strikingly similar across the two trials, despite only one trial showing reductions in
depression. That suggests therapy itself, rather than therapy-induced changes in depression, as the
underlying cause.
Consistent with an interpretation whereby therapy contributes to a more robust self-image, our
analysis of preference outcomes in Section 7 finds significant improvements in self-assessed patience
(0.24SD,p<0.01)andaltruism(0.19SD,p<0.05), butnotincentivized“revealed-preference” measures
of these attributes. We also measure risk tolerance, where neither type of measure is affected by
treatment. This might reflect that patience and altruism are considered normatively “good” traits,
while risk tolerance is more ambiguous. Further supporting the view that treatment strengthened
patients’self-image,wefindthattherapydurablyreducedhighlynegativebeliefsaboutoneself: treated
participants were substantially less likely to report feeling like a failure or feeling bad about themselves
or about letting others down.
Finally, Section 8 reports long-run impacts on economic outcomes. We find no significant effects
on self-reported consumption, intensive or extensive margin labor supply, or earnings, nor on revealed-
preference measures of people’s willingness to work or on their productivity in a bracelet-making
task. For labor-market outcomes such as employment, reservation wages and real-stakes willingness to
accept a job offer, these null effects are reasonably precise. For example, we can rule out increases in
employment of 5 percentage points compared to a control-group mean of 25 percent. The absence of
long-run impacts on labor-market outcomes and consumption may be explained by the fact that the
sample is predominantly female, and women face numerous barriers to working outside the household
in this context (Fletcher, Pande and Moore, 2019).7
We contribute to several literatures. First, we expand the fledgling literature on the long-run
impacts of psychotherapy on depression. Numerous studies have demonstrated the short-run efficacy
of inexpensive psychological interventions in improving mental health in the developing world (Singla
etal.,2017),butlong-runstudiesarerareandfocusonspecialsub-populations(asdiscussedinfootnote
1). Our HAP sample is particularly unique. The HAP trial delivered substantial, cost-effective, long-
run effects of therapy on depression, exceeding the quantitative predictions of experts who had been
presented with the short-run effects. This suggests that the findings of Baranov et al. (2020) generalize
beyond their specific context and population of pregnant women and extend to a simpler form of
therapy delivered by counselors outside of the overburdened public health system.
Second, we take a step towards providing a behavioral science view of psychotherapy, building
on work by Blattman, Jamison and Sheridan (2017), Heller et al. (2017), and Barker et al. (2022).8
Our key contribution relative to these papers is the use of lab-experimental methods to study effects
conservative in their response to positive signals.
7Notethatforthisreasonwepre-specifiedeconomicoutcomesamongthesecondaryoutcomesforourstudy. Inother
exploratory analyses we find significant improvements in self-reported sleep quality and duration, but no impacts on
measures of female empowerment, experienced intimate partner violence, loneliness, or locus of control.
8Blattman, Jamison and Sheridan (2017) show that cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) targeted at increasing self-
controlandreducingimpulsivebehaviorsuccessfullyincreasespatienceandreducesviolentbehavior. Helleretal.(2017)
showthataninterventionwithmanyelementsofCBTreducescrimeanddropoutamongdisadvantagedyouthinChicago,
partlybycausingrecipientstoactlessonautomaticthoughts. Barkeretal.(2022)findCBThadbroadbeneficialeffects
on a sample of the rural poor in Ghana, irrespective of mental health at baseline.
4

of psychotherapy on beliefs, a central aspect of depression and therapy.9 Our findings are broadly
consistent with the theory of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), a standard approach for treating
depression,ofwhichbehavioralactivationisakeyelement. CBTfordepressionaimstoreduceextreme
low self-worth, while teaching people to realistically see themselves as having both strengths and
weaknesses, avoiding over-generalizations and “all or nothing” thinking (Beck et al., 1979; Beck, 2020).
Our finding that patients appear to have a reduced need for overly optimistic belief updating after
therapy, and that they have higher self-perceptions of their own patience and altruism, supports this
view. Our results are contrary to the theory of depressive realism in beliefs, for which we find little
support.
Third, we contribute to the literature on the causal effects of therapy on economic outcomes more
broadly (Ridley et al., 2020). Lund et al. (2022) conduct a meta-analysis of the (mostly short-run)
effects of mental health interventions, targeting a broad range of disorders, on economic outcomes
such as self-reported days missed at work. They find modest average effects on index measures of
labor market and other economic gains, but, similar to our findings, smaller effects when restricting to
psychosocial interventions alone (which include therapy). Our findings are consistent with a view that
improving mental health is not enough to generate sustained economic gains in this population. It is
possiblethattherapywouldgenerategreatereconomicbenefitsaspartofamulti-facetedintervention.10
Finally, we provide novel evidence on perceptions of the efficacy of psychotherapy. When asked
about reasons for not seeking mental healthcare, respondents in ten countries commonly cited lack
of confidence in treatment (Sapiens Lab, 2021). Indeed, our HAP control-group participants under-
estimate treatment efficacy, pointing to possible demand-side barriers to the adoption of effective
treatments. Experiencing therapy durably increased participants’ beliefs about its efficacy, indicating
that demand might increase as the population comes to have more exposure to therapy.
2 Background and Study Design
2.1 Study background
Depression, one of the most common mental disorders, has a life-time prevalence of about 20
percent (Kessler and Wang, 2009). Estimates for India show that about 3.3 percent of the population
suffers from depression at a given point in time (Sagar et al., 2020). More recent evidence suggests
stark increases in mental disorders since the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic in India and globally
(Verma and Mishra, 2020; Santomauro et al., 2021). While depression affects all segments of society,
it is particularly pronounced among the poor in any given setting (Ridley et al., 2020). Depression is
also about 70% more prevalent among women than men (Albert, 2015).
9Wearenotawareofpriorstudiesofthecausaleffectoftherapyonbelief-updatingbehavior,certainlyinthelongrun.
Bottemanneetal.(2022)andKubeetal.(2019)studyketaminetreatment,orinformationandattentionmanipulations.
10Bossuroyetal.(2022)showthataddingpsychosocialsupport—life-skillstrainingandcommunitysensitizationaround
aspirations and social norms—to a multi-faceted intervention including cash transfers, coaching and entrepreneurship
training further improves economic and psychological outcomes among extremely poor households in Niger. Haushofer,
Mudida and Shapiro(2021) find noeffects on eithermental healthor economic well-beingof a therapy intervention one
year after treatment. However, that study did not establish short-term effects on mental health.
5

Despite the high prevalence of depression and the effectiveness of therapy shown in numerous trials
(e.g., Cuijpers et al., 2010, 2015), professional treatment for common mental disorders in the form
of medication or psychotherapy is not available in many parts of the world. A key reason for such
treatmentgapsisthelowsupplyoftrainedpsychiatrists. InIndiaitisestimatedthat85%ofdepressed
individuals do not receive treatment (Gautham et al., 2020). A promising solution is the development
of inexpensive treatments to be delivered by non-specialist counselors (Patel et al., 2009, 2011). Such
interventions have been found to be effective in a range of low-resource settings worldwide (Singla
et al., 2017), including India (Patel et al., 2010).
2.2 Description of trials
Located in Goa, a state on the west coast of India, the non-profit research organization Sangath
seeks to make effective mental-health services more widely accessible by developing and testing non-
specialistmentalhealthcareinterventions.11 WefollowupontwoRCTsofpsychotherapyfordepression
implemented by Sangath in partnership with academic researchers between 2013 and 2016.
Healthy Activity Programme (HAP). The first trial was designed to estimate the effects of
the “Healthy Activity Program” (HAP) psychotherapy intervention on depression 3 and 12 months
post enrollment (Patel et al., 2017; Weobong et al., 2017). The sample of 495 participants aged 18 to
65 was recruited between October 2013 and July 2015 at ten primary health centers (PHCs) in Goa.
Potential participants were screened for depression using the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9),
a nine-item depression screening tool (see Section 4.1 for more details on PHQ-9).
Adults visiting the health centers who screened positive for at least moderately-severe depression—
asmeasuredbyaPHQ-9scoreofatleast15—wereofferedparticipationinthetrial. About2percentof
those screened were found to be eligible for the trial.12 These participants were generally not seeking
treatment for depression and were instead visiting the PHC for other medical conditions. About
two-thirds of those eligible agreed to participate and were randomized into one of two conditions:
• Control group: EUC. The control group received “enhanced usual care” (EUC), which entailed
informing both the participant and the physician at the PHC of the positive depression screening
result. The physician was also provided with adapted treatment guidelines for depression from
the WHO’s Mental Health Gap Action Programme (WHO, 2010). Given the scarcity of trained
psychiatristsandtheworkloadofphysiciansinthePHCs, thisconditioninpracticeentailedlittle
active treatment of depression.
• Treatment group: EUC+HAP. The treatment group received EUC plus HAP, a psychological
treatment based on behavioral activation. The HAP intervention consisted of 6 to 8 weekly
sessions of 30 to 40 minutes each, delivered individually at participants’ homes or at the local
PHC. Counselors were members of the local community, recruited through newspaper advertise-
ments and word of mouth, screened through an interview procedure, and trained by Sangath.
The central aspect of the treatment was to encourage participants to schedule and engage in
11Sangath was co-founded by coauthor Vikram Patel.
128 percent of those screened had at least moderate depression (a PHQ-9 score of at least 10).
6

pleasurable activities of their choice. Depression often involves leads to withdrawal from such
activities, which is thought to feed back into low mood. Behavioral activation is theorized to
operate by breaking these negative cycles of inactivity and depression. Counselors also educated
participants about mental health, taught strategies to avoid rumination, and encouraged them
to take steps to solve the problems they faced in their lives. In case of specific needs, counselors
also taught strategies to improve interpersonal communication skills, improve sleep and train
relaxation.
About 70 percent of HAP participants completed the full course of therapy by attending all the
assignedsessions. Intent-to-treatanalysesrevealedthattheHAPinterventionincreasedremissionfrom
depression(havingaPHQ-9scorebelow10)by25percentagepointsafter3months(Pateletal.,2017)
and by 16 percentage points after 12 months (Weobong et al., 2017). These findings were published
before data collection for our follow up began.
Thinking Healthy Programme Peer-Delivered (THPP). The second RCT was designed to
measure the impacts of the Thinking Healthy Program Peer-delivered (THPP) on depression among
pregnant women (Fuhr et al., 2019). THPP is a simplified version of a psychological intervention
(THP) for treating perinatal depression that has been found to be effective in similar settings and is
recommended by the WHO (Rahman et al., 2008, 2013; WHO, 2015; Baranov et al., 2020). While the
original THP trials employed a full-fledged cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) intervention, THPP
was a simpler intervention focused on behavioral activation, as in the HAP trial described above.
THPP was designed to be delivered by peer counselors, instead of community health workers as in
previous trials.
The trial recruited 280 women with perinatal depression between October 2014 and June 2016.
Study participants were recruited from two antenatal clinics and two primary health centers in the
north district of Goa. Adult women were eligible if they were in their second or third trimester of
pregnancy and screened for depression based on a PHQ-9 score of at least 10. Five percent of pregnant
women exceeded this screening threshold and were thus eligible to participate in the study. Given
the lower screening threshold compared to the HAP trial (10 vs. 15), THPP participants exhibited on
average lower depression severity than HAP participants.
• ControlGroup: EUC.Thecontrolgroupagainreceivedenhancedusualcare(EUC).Thisincluded
standard care from the gynaecologist as well as information to both patients and gynaecologists
thattheparticipanthadscreenedpositivefordepression. Gynaecologistswerealsoprovidedwith
adapted treatment guidelines for perinatal depression (WHO, 2010).
• Treatment Group: EUC+THPP. The treatment group received EUC plus THPP. The counselors
were middle-aged women with children, who had shown an interest in supporting other women
in the community, selected for their good communication skills. The intervention entailed 6 to
14 individual sessions over 7 to 12 months for about 30 to 45 minutes each. The sessions were
divided into four phases, beginning in the second or third trimester of pregnancy and ending
7

six months after childbirth. As with the HAP intervention, the THPP intervention focused on
behavioral activation.
72% of THPP participants completed the course of therapy. Fuhr et al. (2019) report that the
intervention led to moderate improvement in mental health six months after childbirth. Remission
from depression—defined in Fuhr et al. (2019) as a PHQ-9 score below 5—was increased significantly
by11percentagepoints6monthsafterchildbirth,althoughaveragePHQ-9scoreswerenotsignificantly
different between treatment and control groups. These results were not yet unblinded when we began
our data collection.
Training of counselors and cost of treatment. In both trials, counselors received classroom-
based training that focused on intervention content and relationship-building skills, followed by an
internship involving additional training and group supervision (Singla et al., 2014; Sikander et al.,
2015). Given their brief nature and mode of delivery, the interventions were inexpensive, with an
estimated costs (relative to EUC) of $66 per person for HAP (Patel et al., 2016) and $72 for THPP
(Fuhr et al., 2019).
2.3 Recruitment, balance, and incentives
This paper reports data based on follow-up visits conducted on average 5 years after enrollment in
the HAP trial and 4 years after enrollment in the THPP trial. Figures A.1 and A.2 report CONSORT
diagramsforthetwotrials. Sincethetrialshadnotbeendesignedforlong-runfollow-ups, thisentailed
significant difficulty in locating study participants. We attempted to contact all participants through
multiple phone calls or home visits using contact information from the original trials. We asked all
original study participants whom we were able to locate whether they were interested in completing a
follow-up study. All interested participants were offered the choice of completing the follow-up study
activitiesatalocalstudyofficeorintheirhomes(ornearbylocation,suchasalocaltemple). Activities
took place over two sessions, approximately one week apart (see Appendix B for details).
Data collection started in December 2018 and ended in March 2020 due to Covid-19 restrictions in
India. Until then, we were able to follow up with 589 out of 773 participants (76.2%) across the two
trials (Table 1). This follow-up rate is somewhat higher than in Baranov et al. (2020), which might
be due the fact that their follow-up study in Pakistan was about seven years after the treatment was
delivered. Participation in the control group were slightly higher (78%) compared to the treatment
group, though this difference is not statistically significant. Table A.1 shows that follow-up rates were
higher for the HAP trial (79%) than for the THPP trial (69%).
Table 1 shows demographics and baseline mental health across treatment and control groups for
the pooled study sample. The vast majority of study participants were female (88 percent) and
married (81 percent), with an average of just over six years of education. About a third of the sample
was employed at enrollment. Both at baseline and in our follow-up sample, we find no statistically
significant differences across treatment and control groups in their baseline characteristics. An F-test
for balance in baseline characteristics cannot be rejected either at enrollment (p=0.91) or in the follow-
up sample (p=0.73). This implies that the initial randomization was successful and that attrition from
8

baseline to our follow-up was not differential across groups.
Appendix Table A.1 shows the same analysis separately by trial. As expected given the differ-
ent screening criteria, PHQ-9 scores at the time of enrollment are higher in the HAP sample (17.8)
than in the THPP trial (12.8). For each trial, we again find no evidence of imbalances in baseline
characteristics—including baseline PHQ-9 scores—either at baseline or at follow-up. It is also striking
that average characteristics are very similar between our follow-up samples and the full sample, sug-
gesting minimal selective attrition on observable characteristics and giving greater confidence that our
findings generalize to the eligible population.
Our data collection involved a number of experimental tasks to measure beliefs about treatment
effects, belief-updating behavior, economic preferences, and labor supply. Apart from a few hypothet-
ical measures, these tasks were financially incentivized: within each task, one choice was randomly
selected for payment and the rewards incorporated into the participant’s earnings for that session.13
3 Empirical Framework
3.1 Description of empirical framework
Most of our empirical analyses estimate treatment effects on outcomes measured at the participant
level using variants of a standard regression framework:
y = βT +g(X )+ε , (1)
i i i i
where y is the relevant outcome for participant i. T is an indicator variable capturing the treatment
i i
that participant i was assigned to, and g(X ) is a function of a vector of control variables selected by a
i
double machine learning (DML) procedure from Chernozhukov et al. (2018).14. β is the key coefficient
of interest, capturing the impact of each treatment on the outcome of interest. For all outcomes, we
show results for pooling the two trials (our main specification) as well as results for each of the two
trials separately.
Following our pre-registration, we report both estimates without controls (when pooling both trials
we include a trial dummy) and using DML. We include as potential controls all baseline variables that
were collected, a subset of which are shown in Table 1 (categorical variables converted to dummies),
plus surveyor fixed effects. In the pooled specification, for baseline variables that were only measured
in one trial, we impute the mean value of this variable for participants for whom it is missing, and
additionally include a trial fixed effect. Both specifications give very similar point estimates and
precision, consistent with the absence of any meaningful imbalances as demonstrated in Section 2.3.
Treatment was individually randomized so we report robust standard errors, except for our belief-
updating analysis (which uses several observations participant) where we cluster at the individual
13Earnings were rounded up to a minimum of Rs. 400, and participants also received reimbursement of their trans-
portation costs, plus a final bonus of Rs. 200, 2 packets of oil, or an umbrella, for those that completed the whole
study.
14WeusealgorithmDML1. WeusetheRandomForestalgorithmtopredictoutcomeandtreatmentbasedoncontrols
with a 2-folds sample splitting procedure with 100 splits and 1000 trees.
9

level.
When reporting results for categories of outcomes for which we have multiple measures (e.g., the
preference outcomes in Table 5), we also report treatment effects on an index across the measures,
following the inverse covariance weighted approach to index construction recommended by Anderson
(2008). If a participant is missing one or more index components, we adjust the weights proportionally
on the non-missing components, so that the sum of weights is the same for all participants. After
constructing the index measure, we normalize it to mean zero, standard deviation one, in the control
group of the particular regression of interest.
3.2 Pre-analysis plan and multiple hypothesis testing
Our empirical analysis closely follows our pre-analysis plan.15 We deviate from this plan in three
ways. First, we specified that we would stratify the sample-splitting procedure in the DML estimation
by trial. This turned out to be impractical to implement. Since our estimation uses many sample
splits, we believe this is very unlikely to make a material difference. Second, we pre-specified that
our primary measure of overconfidence would be initial overconfidence before the belief-updating task;
later we realized that overconfidence after the task (i.e., after receiving structured feedback) is at least
as interesting, so we report both effects and adjust for multiple comparisons. Third, the elicitation of
beliefs about treatment effects was designed later, and does not appear in the pre-analysis plan.16
Wepre-specifiedfivefamiliesofprimaryoutcomes(depressionmeasuredbyPHQ-9, overconfidence,
belief updating, hiring scheme decisions, and preferences). We adjust for multiple comparisons within
each family when relevant, and report false discovery rate (FDR) q-values in the regression tables.17
We pre-specified economic outcomes (employment, consumption) as secondary (along with female em-
powerment, intimate partner violence, and sleep), since our participants mostly have limited economic
opportunities. Wedonotcorrectsecondaryoutcomesformultiple-hypothesestestingandtheiranalysis
should be interpreted as exploratory.
3.3 Expert predictions
To quantify how our results compare with current scientific understanding, we conducted surveys
of experts in economics and mental health to elicit their forecasts about the treatment effects of psy-
chotherapy on the main outcomes we study (DellaVigna, Pope and Vivalt, 2019). The survey was
posted on the Social Science Prediction Platform, which maintains a mailing list of experts (primarily
faculty and graduate students in economics and behavioral science). In addition, we solicited partici-
pation via emails to experts in psychology and psychiatry. Altogether, 234 experts made forecasts, of
15We posted the pre-analysis plan to the AEA trial registry shortly after the start of our data collection activities:
https://doi.org/10.1257/rct.3823-1.0.
16There are two other minor points of note. First, we specified that our primary analysis would follow an intent-to-
treat approach, but that we would report instrumental variables estimates if the “first stage” was sufficiently strong.
Our estimates are statistically significant but the F-statistic is below conventional thresholds, so we do not report IV
estimates. Second,wepre-specifiedthatwewoulddropbinaryoutcomesiftherewassignificantbunching(90%ormore
with the same outcome). This applies to one of our outcomes, which sought to measure default effects.
17Whileresultsregardingmultiplefamiliesofoutcomes(e.g.,overconfidenceandbeliefupdating)arepresentedinthe
same table for ease of exposition, FDR corrections are done within family as described here.
10

which 145 were economists and 41 were experts in mental health (usually psychiatry or psychology).
Others were in fields such as public policy, biostatistics, and political science.
For simplicity and to reduce the burden on forecasters, we elicited predictions only for the HAP
trial. We chose HAP since this was the larger of our two trials and had a significant short-term impact
on depression, making forecasts of long-run effects more meaningful. Forecasters were informed about
the design of the study, the baseline levels of depression, and impacts on PHQ-9 scores three and
twelve months after enrollment. They were then asked to predict the effects found during our five-year
follow-upon(i)PHQ-9scores, (ii)initialoverconfidenceandasymmetryinbelief-updating, (iii)indices
of time, risk and social preferences, and (iv) consumption and employment. The expert predictions
are shown in Figure 8 and in Appendix Table A.16, and discussed when presenting results.
4 Impacts on Depression
4.1 Treatment effects on depression
Our main measure of depression is the participant’s score on the Patient Health Questionnaire-9
(PHQ-9), a screening tool which asks patients about the frequency of experiencing nine symptoms of
depressionoverthepasttwoweeks(Kroenke,SpitzerandWilliams,2002). Thismeasureiswidelyused
inclinicalresearch,validatedinIndia,anddesignedtobeadministeredbylaypeople(Pateletal.,2008;
Manea, Gilbody and McMillan, 2012; Indu et al., 2018). It has also been shown to adequately capture
improvements in depression due to clinical interventions, thus mitigating concerns about experimenter
demand effects (Löwe et al., 2006; McMillan, Gilbody and Richards, 2010; Beard et al., 2016). We use
average PHQ-9 scores as a measure of severity of depression and standard thresholds of PHQ-9 scores
below 10 and 5 to categorize moderate and mild depression, respectively, following earlier phases of
the two trials (Patel et al., 2017; Weobong et al., 2017; Fuhr et al., 2019).18
Pooling the two trials, we find evidence of long-run reductions in depression in the treatment group
(Table 2, Column 2). Specifically, the treatment reduced participants’ average PHQ-9 score by 0.85
points on a base of just below 8 (p=0.08), a 0.15 SD improvement. Treatment increases remission from
depression by 11 and 8 percentage points for the mild and moderate depression screening thresholds,
respectively (p<0.01 and p=0.03). Considering each sub-component of the PHQ-9 index, treatment
significantly reduces the frequency with which participants report feeling bad about themselves—like
a failure, letting down themselves or their families—and of experiencing poor appetite or overeating
(Appendix Table A.2, point estimates also suggest reductions in feeling down or hopeless, having poor
sleep, and feeling tired and low energy). Consistent with the effects on depression, we find a 0.39 point
(or 0.17 SD) increase in a mood score—average self-reported happiness over three days—across the
two trials (p=0.04).
The treatment effect on depression is entirely driven by the HAP intervention (Table 2, Column 4).
HAPreducedPHQ-9scoresfiveyearslaterby1.37points, a0.23SDreduction(p=0.02), andincreased
remissionfrombothmild andmoderate depression by 13percentagepoints(p<0.01). Thesetreatment
18We report estimates both without controls and from the DML specification. Since both specifications give very
similar conclusions, we report the slightly more conservative DML estimates in the text.
11

effects seem to be concentrated among participants who—five years after enrollment—would have had
mild or moderate depression in the absence of treatment: Figure 2 Panel A shows a clear difference
in the distributions of HAP treatment and control groups for endline PHQ-9 scores of 12 and below,
while the two distributions are nearly indistinguishable for higher PHQ-9 scores. In contrast, we find
no significant effect of the THPP treatment on depression (Table 2, Column 6), and the distributions
of PHQ-9 scores appear identical across the THPP treatment and control groups (Figure 2 Panel B).19
We also find no systematic evidence of heterogeneous treatment effects by baseline characteristics.20
Figure 3 shows the full trajectory of moderate depression (PHQ-9 ≥ 10) over the course of the
studies, including the previous waves of these trials. Appendix Figure A.4 shows trajectories for
mean PHQ-9, and mild depression, respectively. As documented in previous work (Patel et al., 2017;
Weobong et al., 2017), HAP reduced depression three months and one year after the intervention. Re-
markably,thetreatmenteffectsoneyearafterthetreatment(17percentagepointprevalencereduction)
were largely maintained in our follow-up study another four years later. The relatively small effects
of THPP that we report are consistent with the short-run effects reported after our data collection
began: Fuhr et al. (2019) find a marginally significant reduction of 1.5 PHQ-9 points three months
after the intervention, but the treatment effect is less pronounced and no longer statistically significant
six months after the intervention.
Althoughwefindnoevidenceofselectiveattrition, onemightstillbeconcernedthatattritioncould
influence the results. Appendix Table A.3 reports the “no control” estimates from Table 2, along with
Lee(2009)boundsand95%confidenceintervalsonthebounds(weuseTauchmann(2014)’sleebounds
Stata package. For HAP, all of the bounds exclude zero; the 95% confidence interval excludes zero for
the PHQ-9< 5 cutoff and essentially coincides with zero for the PHQ-9< 10 cutoff. Consistent with
the nonsignificant main effects, none of the bounds for THPP exclude zero.
4.2 Discussion
Arguably the most policy-relevant result in this study is the sustained reduction in depression due
to the HAP intervention. This enhances the already favorable cost-effectiveness estimate for HAP, as
illustratedinFigureA.5PanelA.Basedontheshort-runestimates, theHAPinterventionaverted0.38
depression months—i.e., a participant with a PHQ-9 score above 10 in a given month—at 3 months
and 2.25 depression months at 1 year.21 The long-run effects increase this estimate to 9.02 depression
months averted at 5 years, more than quadrupling the the short-run estimates alone. Given the costs
of the treatment of $66 per participant, this implies a cost of $7.32 per depression month saved, if we
19Due to limited power when comparing across trials, we cannot reject that the THPP and HAP trials had equal
treatment effects except for one marginally significant estimate (Table 2, Column 7).
20We explore heterogeneous treatment effects in two ways. First, as pre-registered, we implement the Chernozhukov
et al. (2020) machine learning approach, which searches for combinations of variables that jointly predict heterogeneity
intreatmenteffects. FigureA.3presentsSortedGroupAverageTreatmentEffects(GATES)forquartilesoftheMachine
Learning-based proxy predictors. While there appears to be some heterogeneity—the difference between the largest
and smallest estimate is quantitatively large—it is noisy and unpredictable. Second, we run regressions interacting the
treatment indicators with key baseline variables, and find that only participants’ age at baseline predicts treatment
effects on depression (Table A.4).
21These calculations involve linear interpolation of effects between the 3 and 12 month effects, and similarly between
the 12 and 60 month effects.
12

conservatively assume no further effects beyond five years and ignore the short-run earnings gains and
averted health expenditures documented in Patel et al. (2017) and Weobong et al. (2017).
FigureA.6expressesourresultsintermsofQuality-AdjustedLifeYears(QALYs)gainedasaresult
of treatment.22 We find that treated participants in HAP gained on average 0.32 QALYs relative to
control, implying a cost per QALY of $206. A common rule of thumb for cost-effectiveness is 1–
3 multiples of GDP per capita ($1,438 in 2013, when HAP was launched), according to which the
program would be clearly considered cost effective.
These long-run effects of HAP significantly exceeded expert forecasts. Experts were informed
about the short-run effects of HAP on PHQ-9 scores, and asked to predict the effects five years after
enrollment, as reported in Figure 8 and Table A.16. The median expert predicted a reduction in
PHQ-9 scores of 0.08 SD, with over 90% of experts underestimating the actual estimated effect of 0.23
SD. The median prediction among economists (−0.07 SD) was similar to that of mental health experts
(−0.1 SD). Our findings imply that psychotherapy for depression may be even more effective—through
having more persistent effects—than experts believe.
The under-estimation of the long-run effects of therapy in our context might be explained by the
paucity of similar long-run studies. Figure 1 plots our estimates compared to those from the literature,
focusing on non-specialist psychotherapy trials in low- and middle-income countries. A vast majority
of studies measure impacts at 12 months or less after enrollment, showing sizable short-run effects on
average, withsubstantialvariationacrosstrials. OnlyBaranovetal.(2020)andBlattmanetal.(2022)
measure effects at a longer time horizon than ours. Our HAP findings complement theirs by studying
a general population of adults as opposed to their samples of pregnant women and “criminally-involved
young men.” Our THPP trial, Maselko et al. (2020) (3-year followup), and Baranov et al. (2020) (7-
year followup) evaluated closely-related programs. Maselko et al. (2020) evaluate an extended version
of THPP, while Baranov et al. (2020) study THP which involves more intensive therapy delivered by
community health workers.
Why did the HAP and THPP trials have different long-run (and short-run) effects? A striking
difference between the two samples is the much higher rate of spontaneous remission from depression
in the THPP trial, leaving little room for large treatment effects. Depression in the sample of pregnant
women in the THPP trial has a more circumscribed environmental trigger (pregnancy and childbirth),
which may explain the high rates of remission. Maselko et al. (2020) also observe high rates of control-
group remission, and find similar treatment effects to ours (a positive but non-significant effect).
Baranov et al. (2020) find both less remission in the control group, and larger long-run impacts. Other
differences between HAP and THPP could also explain the difference.23 In any case, we note that the
lackofeffectsintheTHPPtrialarguablyreducesanyconcernsthattreatedparticipantsfeeldifferential
22We use weights from Furukawa et al. (2021) to convert PHQ-9 units to QALYs, noting that this scale is based on
rich-country samples and should be treated as indicative only.
23The HAP trial recruited a sample with higher baseline severity of depression, which could diminish the rate of
spontaneous remission without treatment. However, Figure A.7 shows no evidence of a treatment effect in THPP when
restricting to participants with baseline PHQ-9 > 15, as in the HAP trial. Even for this sub-sample, spontaneous
remission in the control group remains more common in the THPP trial than in HAP. We also restrict the sample
further to more closely match the age profile of the HAP sample, this gives us positive but noisy long-run estimates.
HAPtrialparticipantsalsoreportedhavingbeendepressedformuchlongeratenrollmentthanTHPPtrialparticipants
(42 weeks versus 11 weeks, Appendix Table A.1).
13

social pressure to report improvements in symptoms of depression.
Finally,itisworthdiscussingwhy therapyhadsuchpersistenteffectsintheHAPtrial. Asdescribed
below, we do not find evidence of improvements in economic well-being, so improved material circum-
stances are an unlikely source of the persistent psychological benefits. Instead, a likely explanation is
that participants learned the principles of behavioral activation and employed them to manage future
mental health challenges (Barker et al. (2022) argue for a similar mechanism). Figure A.8 reports
the results of a mediation analysis, which finds that the strongest mediator of the long-run effect on
depression is—unsurprisingly—the short-run effect on depression. The next strongest mediator is a
measureofbehavioralactivation,theextenttowhichparticipantswereactiveandengagedinenjoyable
activities, just as they were taught during the therapy intervention.
5 Perceived Treatment Efficacy
Manypeoplewhomightbenefitfromtherapydonotseekitout(Cronin,ForsstromandPapageorge,
2020). A lack of familiarity with therapy and skepticism about its efficacy are commonly stated in
surveys(SapiensLab,2021). EspeciallyinsettingssuchasIndia, wherepsychotherapywasunavailable
until recently, learning by experience (and subsequent diffusion through social networks) may foster
demand for therapy.
To test this idea, we elicited study participants’ beliefs about the short- and long-run effects of
therapy on depression. During our long-run follow-up surveys, each participant was asked about the
treatment effects in their own trial for three time horizons: at three or six months, at one year, and
at four to five years after the completion of the treatment. We elicited participants’ beliefs about
the probability of remission from depression—as measured by having a PHQ-9 score below 10—for
both the treatment and control groups, with the difference being the perceived treatment effect.24 We
incentivized the belief measures for accuracy by comparing their answers to our causal estimates.25
Figure 4 and Table 3 show the resulting estimates.
Our first result is that control-group participants in HAP tend to under-estimate the treatment ef-
fectsoftheirhighly-effectiveintervention,whilethoseinTHPPover-estimatetheeffectsoftheirlargely
ineffective intervention. The HAP control group underestimates the HAP treatment effects at all time
horizons,bybetween5and15percentagepoints,astatisticallysignificantdifferenceforthetwoshorter-
run time horizons (Figure 4 Panel A). In contrast, the THPP control group overestimates the THPP
treatmenteffectsatalltimehorizons(Figure4PanelB).Thissuggestswecannotexpectinexperienced
patients—as in the control group—to identify effective treatments without additional guidance. Con-
sistent with this, Table A.4 shows that ex-ante expectations of the efficacy of treatment—measured in
24Specifically, we described the program to them, detailing the intervention received by the treatment group and the
controlgroup(forHAPparticipantswedescribedtheHAPintervention,forTHPPparticipantswedescribedtheTHPP
intervention). Wethenasked,foreachhorizonandforthetreatmentandcontrolgroupseparately,whattheparticipant
believed would be the remission rate in that group. Specifically, we asked, out of 10 randomly selected members of the
group,howmanywouldhavehadtheirdepression“reducedtohealthylevels.” Wethencomputetheparticipant’sbelief
aboutthetreatmenteffectasthedifferencebetweenthesetworemissionrates. Incentivesusedaquadraticscoringrule.
If selected for payment, the question paid Rs. 75 minus 0.75 times their squared error.
25We added the beliefs about treatment effects module a short while after the surveys were launched, so we do not
have this measure for all participants. For the same reason, these beliefs are not part of our pre-registration.
14

the baseline survey using an unincentivized Likert-scale question—do not predict individual treatment
effects.
Second, experiencingthetreatmentincreasesperceivedeffectivenessoftherapyinthelongrun. For
both trials, the treatment group’s beliefs (dark blue) about the medium and long-run treatment effects
are significantly more positive (by 7 to 11 percentage points) than the control group’s beliefs (light
blue). We find no differences in beliefs about the short-run impacts of therapy, which may reflect
difficulty recalling how quickly treatment led to improvements. This latter finding also arguably
provides evidence against differential social pressure to state positive beliefs among the treatment
group, since we might expect such demand effects to upward-bias responses for all time horizons.
What are the takeaways from these results? First, a common result in both trials is that experi-
encing psychotherapy makes people more optimistic about its effectiveness. If such changes in beliefs
spreadinsocialnetworks, theymightincreasedemandfortreatment. Second, wecannotexpectpeople
to identify the most effective treatments by themselves. Indeed, even experience with therapy may
not solve this problem, as it causes participants to become more optimistic even about a relatively
ineffective treatment. Participants appear to find it difficult to disentangle true treatment effects from
the improvements in their mental health that would occur even in the absence of any treatment. This
is a challenge patients face in judging healthcare efficacy in many contexts, and suggests a potential
roleforinformationprovisionandoversightofmentalhealthtreatments, tobeexploredinfuturework.
6 Self-confidence and Belief Updating
Therapy can durably improve mental health. This included notable changes in patients’ self-
perceptions: treated participants were significantly less likely to perceive themselves as a failure or to
feel they had let themselves or their families down. This kind of self-perception is inherently subjective
and broad, and the findings suggest that therapy results in a more robust self-image. In this section,
we turn to rigorously measuring self-perceptions in an economic domain with an objective measure
of truth. In particular, we study self-confidence: people’s beliefs about how well they perform at a
meaningful work task relative to others. We find that therapy causes such beliefs about oneself to
become more accurate, by reducing asymmetry in processing informative feedback.
6.1 Measuring confidence and belief updating
Wemeasureself-confidenceandbeliefupdatingusinganexperimentalparadigmextensivelyapplied
in previous work with Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic (WEIRD) samples
(e.g., Eil and Rao, 2011; Ertac, 2011; Buser, Gerhards and Van Der Weele, 2018; Coutts, 2019; Zim-
mermann, 2020; Mobius et al., 2021). We closely follow the design of Mobius et al. (2021), adapting
it for low-numeracy participants by developing detailed instructions augmented with examples and
employing a novel belief elicitation method using physical aids in the spirit of Delavande, Giné and
McKenzie (2011).
Participants complete an incentivized work task before reporting their beliefs about whether they
scored in the top half of a group of participants. They then update these beliefs following noisy but
15

informative feedback. We use this paradigm to study whether the treatments affected participants’
confidence in their own performance, and the nature of their belief updating. Of particular interest is
whether treatment participants put disproportionate weight on positive compared to negative signals,
and thus become more overconfidence over time. Such belief-updating patterns have been interpreted
as evidence of “optimism bias” in an attempt to protect one’s ego (Mobius et al., 2021).
Work task. Participants are asked to create bracelets using string and beads. During a practice
phase, participants learned the quality criteria: a precise number of beads, a knot, and the extra string
being cut off. After this practice phase, participants make bracelets for ten minutes and are paid
Rs. 5 for each completed bracelet, subject to quality standards. This task was chosen as it requires
dexterity, skill, and concentration, and is thus potentially seen as ego-relevant. It is also relevant to
their real economic lives, as creating beaded bracelets for sale is similar to the types of jobs that many
of them could pursue in their everyday lives. To further enhance this effect, we told participants in
advancethat, dependingontheirperformance, theymaybeofferedarealbracelet-makingjobafterthe
experiment (see below). As we describe in Section 8, we find no evidence of differences in objectively
measured performance across the two treatment groups.
Eliciting beliefs. Upon completing the task, participants are asked to assess their performance
relative to nine randomly selected previous study participants.26 Specifically, we elicited their belief
about the probability of being in the top half of a group of 10 participants (including themselves).
Participants express their beliefs by allocating water between two containers, which represent the
two states of the world (top half/bottom half). Thus we use visual aids representing probabilities—as
recommendedby,e.g.,Delavande,GinéandMcKenzie(2011)—whileallowingforcontinuoussubjective
beliefs. Beliefs are incentivized using a truncated log scoring rule. Participants could directly see how
an allocation of water translated into monetary payoffs in each state of the world, via a labeled scale
on the containers.27
Noisy signals. After reporting their priors, participants receive five rounds of noisy but informa-
tivesignals, andcanupdatetheirreportedbeliefaftereachsignal. Signalsareindependentlygenerated
messages indicating whether the participant scored in the top half of the group (“high” signal, H) or
not (“low” signal, L). The message is accurate with probability 2 and inaccurate otherwise.28 After
3
the bracelet-making task was finished, we explained the belief elicitation, and elicited priors (“Initial”).
Then, we explained how signals would work, and gave the opportunity to adjust the initial response
26For the first few participants we sampled from pilot participants, who were not part of the THPP and HAP trials.
Once we had sufficiently many comparators, we switched to sampling from the actual trial population. We sampled
comparators of the same gender as the participant, to avoid imbalances due to gender differences in performance.
27We implemented a truncated log scoring rule, i.e., leaving a container empty corresponds to assigning a very small
floor probability (cid:15) to that state of the world. When a participant puts a fraction p of the water in the container
i
corresponding to the true state of the world, incentives are calculated as constant∗(log(p +(cid:15))−log((cid:15))) which can be
i
representedonavisualscalestartingat0oneachcontainer. Aslongassubjectivebeliefsassignaprobabilityofatleast
(cid:15) to each state of the world, this truncated log scoring rule is strictly proper, i.e., it is incentive compatible for a risk-
neutral expected-utility maximizer to report beliefs truthfully (Selten, 1998). While other mechanisms hold additional
desirable properties in theory, they require sophisticated computations that are challenging to explain to low-numeracy
participants, and complicated mechanisms can backfire (Danz, Vesterlund and Wilson, 2022).
28Signals are explained to participants using the image of a die that determines whether the signal is truthful (if the
dierollsa1,2,3,ora4)ornot(ifthedierollsa5ora6). Actualrealizationsweregeneratedusingthesurveysoftware
(SurveyCTO), so the enumerator is blind to the true state of the world.
16

(“Adjust”). Then, we revealed each signal one by one, and elicited posteriors following each one, giving
us a total of seven elicited beliefs per participant. Participants are incentivized to truthfully report
their beliefs at every round, since one of their (prior or posterior) beliefs is randomly chosen to “count”
for the payment of accuracy incentives.
Measuring confidence. We createa measureof confidence by comparingparticipants’ subjective
beliefs to objective measures of their relative performance. Using the actual distribution of task
performance in our sample, we derive a full-information benchmark for each participant, i.e., their
true probability of being in the upper half of a randomly-sampled group of 10. We define initial
overconfidence as the difference between participants’ subjective vs. true probability of being in the
top half. After each signal, we update the Bayesian benchmark using Bayes’ rule, and compute the
path of overconfidence as the difference between reported posteriors and the updated benchmark.
Estimating belief updating parameters. Closely following Mobius et al. (2021), we use the
designtostudydeviationsfromBayesianinformationprocessingusingasimplelinearregressionframe-
work. Writing down Bayes’ rule in logit form yields
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:20) (cid:21)
µ µ Pr(s |i in upper half)
i,t+1 i,t i,t
ln = ln +ln , (2)
1−µ 1−µ Pr(s |i in lower half)
i,t+1 i,t i,t
where µ is the Bayesian posterior for participant i being in the upper half given prior µ and
i,t+1 i,t
signal s . Adding three parametric degrees of freedom leads to a simple structural model:
i,t
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21)
µ µ Pr(H|upper half) Pr(L|upper half)
ln i,t+1 =δln i,t +β ·1(s =H)·ln +β ·1(s =L)·ln ,
1−µ 1−µ H i,t Pr(H|lower half) L i,t Pr(L|lower half)
i,t+1 i,t
where δ captures the weight on the prior, and β and β measure the weight on positive and negative
H L
signals, respectively. ThemodelsnestsBayesianupdatingwithδ = β = β = 1andcanbeestimated
H L
using OLS and the specific likelihood ratios in our experiment:
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
µ µ
ln i,t+1 = δln i,t +β ·ln(2)·1(s = H)−β ·ln(2)·1(s = L)+(cid:15) (3)
H i,t L i,t it
1−µ 1−µ
i,t+1 i,t
We focus on the coefficients β (response to good news), β (response to bad news), and their
H L
difference β −β which captures asymmetric belief updating. We also consider “conservatism:” the
H L
value of β obtained by imposing β =β =β¯, i.e., forcing symmetric responses to good and bad news.
H L
Sample restrictions. As pre-registered, our main analysis drops observations with a degenerate
prior or posterior, i.e., µ ,µ ∈ {0,1}, since the log likelihood ratios in the regression equation are
i,t i,t+1
not defined for degenerate beliefs. In robustness checks, following Mobius et al. (2021), we sequentially
drop observations who violate basic rules of Bayesian updating: (i) participants who never update
their beliefs in response to feedback; (ii) individual observations without an update; (iii) individual
observations that update in the wrong direction (i.e., opposite to the signal), and (iv) participants that
ever who never update, ever update in the wrong direction or ever report a degenerate belief.29
29In practice, surveyors would place each beaker on an electronic scale after each round of feedback to capture the
reportedbeliefs. Thisleadstoverysmallvariationsinbeliefsevenwhentheparticipantdidnothing,duetomeasurement
error. Forthepurposeofdefiningnon-updates,weincludeupdatesthatarebelow0.004inmagnitude,whichcorresponds
to 4 milliliters of water, within the measurement error of this weighing procedure.
17

Job application decision. After participants have completed the beliefs task, they are offered
a job application decision: They can either take an outside option of Rs. 300 for sure (about a day’s
wage), or choose to apply for a job that offers Rs. 3,000 for making 1,000 bracelets over the course
of one month. While the job is lucrative for participants with capacity to take on additional work, it
is only offered to participants whose performance is in the upper half of the sample.30 Anyone who
applies but is in the lower half of their group is not hired and receives Rs. 0. Thus, the more likely a
participant believes that they are in the upper half, the more attractive the opportunity becomes. We
discuss impacts on the application decision alongside other labor market outcomes in Section 8.
6.2 Overconfidence and belief updating in the control group
Before discussing the treatment effect of therapy on confidence and belief updating, we first study
the beliefs of participants who did not receive therapy. This is interesting because, in connection with
the theory of depressive realism, some scholars have argued that depression is related to an absence of
optimistic belief-updating (Korn et al., 2013). However, evidence is scarce, and more generally, such
optimistic biases in belief-updating have been studied exclusively in WEIRD populations (Benjamin,
2019).
Prior to receiving any signal, control-group participants exhibit significant overconfidence relative
to the Bayesian benchmark, as illustrated by the light-blue line in Figure 5 Panel A, and the first row
of Table 4. On average, participants’ priors overestimate their true probability of being in the top half
by around 13 percentage points (p<0.001). Initial overconfidence is driven by HAP trial participants,
who overestimate their performance by 22 percentage points (p<0.001). In contrast, THPP trial
participants are closer to the truth and in fact slightly under-confident. Overconfidence in the control
group increases further after receiving noisy but on average truthful signals. After receiving all five
signals, control participants overestimated their performance by 16 percentage points (p<0.001), a
relative increase of 23 percent. This increase in overconfidence is suggestive evidence of optimistic
updating: since signals are informative on average, a Bayesian should trend toward accuracy. The
increase in confidence is larger in THPP, where the average participant has moved from slightly under-
to slightly overconfident by the end of the task.
Estimating the parameters from equation 3, we find clear evidence of optimistic belief updating
in the control group (Table 4 Panel B). The estimate of β = 0.73 for the full sample shows that
H
participants on average update reasonably close to the Bayesian benchmark (β = 1) in response to
H
positive signals (though we can reject β = 1). In contrast, the estimate of β = −0.09 is close to
H L
zero, and we cannot reject that on average the control group does not update at all in response to
negative signals. The stark difference between these estimates implies that belief updating is highly
asymmetric and optimistic (Panel C). We estimate β − β = 0.82, implying a strikingly strong
H L
pattern of optimistic belief updating (p<0.001), much more pronounced than in previous studies with
non-depressed,high-incomesamples(Mobiusetal.,2021;Buser,GerhardsandVanDerWeele,2018).31
30The average participant made around 5 bracelets in the allotted 10 minutes. Under the conservative assumption
of no learning by doing, that would imply around 33 hours’ work to make 1,000 bracelets, for which the compensation
approximates 10 days’ wages.
31Since good and bad news are on average equally likely, it also means that participants are on average quite un-
18

6.3 Effects of psychotherapy on belief updating
Priortoreceivinganysignal,wefindnoevidenceofsignificantdifferencesinoverconfidencebetween
treated individuals (dark blue) and control individuals (light blue) (Figure 5 Panel A). The treatment
group is slightly less overconfident initially than the control group, though this difference in confidence
is not statistically significant (Table 4 Panel A). However, unlike the control group, the treated group’s
beliefs trend downward over the course of the experiment, becoming significantly less overconfident by
theendofthetask. Afterreceivingallsignals,thetreatedgroupis8percentagepointslessoverconfident
than the control group (p=0.02, q=0.05). The treatment effect on overconfidence is similar across the
two trials (−0.07 vs. −0.09), though only the estimate for HAP is (marginally) significant.
The estimated belief updating parameters confirm the widening gap in overconfidence between
treatment and control participants (Table 4 Panel B and Figure 5 Panel B). Across the two trials,
psychotherapy reduces β by about a third (0.21 units, p=0.03, q=0.07), while β slightly increases
H L
(by 0.06, not significant). As a result, we find that optimistic belief updating (β −β ), decreased
H L
by 0.27 units (p=0.08, q=0.16), a reduction of about a third compared to the control group mean.
Average responsiveness to signals (‘conservatism’, β¯) reduces slightly by -0.06 SD (p=0.30,q=0.40). In
other words, psychotherapy appears to have made participants treat feedback on their performance
substantially more evenhandedly, and be slightly less sensitive to feedback in general. As a result,
the treatment group exhibits lower levels of overconfidence at the end of the belief updating exercise.
Finally, just as control group parameters were similar between trials, the treatment effects on belief
updating are quantitatively strikingly similar between trials. For instance, the treatment effect on β
H
is −0.22 in the HAP sample (p<0.09, q=0.18) and −0.20 in the THPP sample (p=0.15, q=0.31).
Our main findings of reduced belief updating based on good news and reduced overoptimism in
response to treatment are robust to tighter sample restrictions in two main ways (Appendix Table
A.8, Figure 6).32 First, we re-estimate equation 3 dropping non-updates. Excluding participants who
never update at all (Panel B), increases the magnitude of the treatment effect on β to −0.28 and
H
that on asymmetry to −0.38. Additionally dropping all individual instances where a participant did
not update relative to their previous belief (Panel C), the magnitude of the effects increases further
to β = −0.36 and β −β = −0.50. Our second check is to instead exclude participants who ever
H H L
update in the wrong direction (Panel D), which yields similar estimates of β and β −β compared
H H L
to the baseline specification (Panel A). Finally, Panel E drops all participants who never update their
beliefs, ever update in the wrong direction, or ever have a degenerate prior or posterior. In this highly
restricted (thus lower powered) specification, we find qualitatively similar results, including significant
responsive to information. Forcing the model to treat positive and negative signals equivalently, we find the average
response to signals (“conservatism”) is β¯ = 0.29. While there was some difference in initial overconfidence between
samples, our estimates of the belief-updating parameters are quantitatively very similar between samples: for HAP we
estimateβ =0.73andβ =−0.13, whileforTHPPweestimateβ =0.67andβ =−0.03. Thistranslatesintovery
H L H L
similar estimates of asymmetry, of 0.85 and 0.69 respectively (both highly significant, p<0.001).
32Appendix Table A.7 explores what types of updating behaviors are contributing to our findings. We find some
evidence that treatment participants are less likely to have a degenerate posterior (in THPP), and that treatment
participants are less likely to not update after a negative signal (both trials). Our robustness checks suggest these
are not driving the overall results. Panel G reports comprehension-test results for the the beliefs task. We find high
comprehension(participantsanswered15outof19questionscorrectlyonaverage)withnomeaningfuldifferencesbetween
treatment groups.
19

asymmetry and treatment effects of similar quantitiative magnitude, but the treatment effects are no
longer statistically significant.
6.4 Discussion
Howdothesefindingsrelatetotheoriesofpsychotherapyanddepression? First, ourresultsprovide
littlesupportforthetheoryofdepressiverealism. Thisinfluentialhypothesisproposesthatpeoplewith
depression are “sadder but wiser,” based on (mixed) cross-sectional evidence that healthy individuals
are more overoptimistic than depressed individuals (Alloy and Abramson, 1979; Alloy and Ahrens,
1987; Moore and Fresco, 2012; Dev et al., 2022). Closest to our paper, Korn et al. (2013) find a
significant cross-sectional correlation of depression symptoms with less optimistic belief updating in a
sample of 37 adults. We find only a small, non-significant correlation in the same direction, and the
causal effect of therapy—our main contribution—opposes the prediction of the hypothesis.33
Instead, our findings are broadly consistent with the underlying theory and proposed mechanisms
of forms of psychotherapy—including CBT, of which behavioral activation is a component—which
seek to make patients see themselves in a more realistic light as having both strengths and weaknesses
(Beck, 2020). Therapy reduced highly negative self-perceptions in a broad and subjective domain by
reducing feelings of being a failure, as described in Section 4. This more robust self-image might have
reduced participants’ psychological need for overconfidence in the specific novel economic domain we
studied (Blanton et al., 2001; Sherman and Cohen, 2006; Kolubinski et al., 2018).
The expert surveys we conducted reveal belief in the hypothesis of depressive realism. The median
expert predicted that the control group—which displays high rates of depression—would respond
symmetrically to negative and positive signals (β = β ).34 In contrast, we found much stronger
L H
belief-updating in response to positive than negative signals in the control group (our estimate of β
L
is small and actually negative, so β /β = −0.13). The median expert forecast lies outside the 99%
L H
confidence interval for this estimate, and every single forecast lies outside the 90% confidence interval.
Experts also (incorrectly) predicted treatment to increase initial overconfidence—before receiving any
signals—and to increase optimistic updating, presumably through the channel of reduced depression
and thus less depressive realism.35
Intriguingly, we find quantitatively similar treatment effects in both trials. This suggests that
depression is unlikely to be the key mediator of the impacts on self-confidence and belief updating. A
33Appendix Table A.9 investigates if healthy individuals (those in remission) are more overoptimistic than depressed
individuals (those not in remission). To do this, we re-estimate equation (3) separately for the currently depressed, and
those in remission (having a PHQ-9 score below 10). We use only control participants for this exercise, since in the
treatment group current depression status is confounded with treatment. In line with depressive realism we find that
remission is positively (but not significantly) associated with overconfidence and asymmetric updating. Therefore, our
cross-sectional data are weakly consistent with the hypothesis, while treatment effects go in the opposite direction.
34For simplicity, we did not separately elicit forecasts about β and β but instead asked experts to predict their
H L
ratio (β /β = 1), which is an intuitive measure of asymmetry. A caveat to this analysis is that the expert forecast
L H
surveydidnotallowfornegativevaluesofβ /β =1. However,noneoftheexpertschosethesmallestpermittedvalue,
L H
suggesting that this is unlikely to have affected the results.
35Specifically, experts forecasted a change in the ratio ∆β /β = −0.22, while we estimated ∆β /β = +0.06. All
L H L H
forecasts lay outside the 90% confidence intervals. Expert forecasts for treatment effects on initial overconfidence also
went in the wrong direction.
20

formal mediation analysis presented in Figure A.8 is also consistent with this claim. Therapy seems
to change people’s belief-formation process through channels beyond mental health.
7 Preferences
Wenextturntothelong-runimpactsoftherapyonthreeimportanteconomicpreferences: patience,
altruism, and risk tolerance. These preferences drive behaviors across many important economic do-
mains, such as consumption, investment, and public-goods provision. Existing research has examined
the correlation between depression and these preferences. We contribute to this literature by adding
evidence on the causal effect of psychotherapy for depression.
For each type of preference, we collected real-stakes experimental measures (pre-specified as our
primary outcomes) as well as self-evaluation survey measures taken from the Global Preference Survey
(GPS) of Falk et al. (2016). We report the effects on each measure and also combine measures of a
given preference into a standardized index following Anderson (2008).36
Altruism. A number of studies have found that depression negatively correlates with altruistic
behavior (Alarcón and Forbes, 2017). Different explanations have been proposed, including that de-
pression takes the pleasure out of altruistic behavior or that depressed people are more focused on
their own needs. Experts predicted a modest causal effect of the HAP intervention on altruism, with
a median forecast of a 0.1 SD increase in the altruism index.
Wecollecttwomeasuresofaltruism. Thefirstisanincentivizeddictatorgame,inwhichparticipants
choose how much of Rs. 50 to send to another (unknown) participant in the experiment (keeping the
remainder for themselves). The secondary measure is a self-assessment survey question from the GPS.
This asks, on a scale of 1–10, “How willing are you to give to good causes without expecting anything
in return?” The index variable combines these two outcomes.
Table 5 Panel A shows a 0.21 SD effect of treatment on the index of altruism (p=0.01, q=0.04).
The effect in the HAP trial is similar to the overall effect (0.25 SD), which is somewhat larger than the
median expert forecast of 0.1 SD (42 percent of experts lie outside the 90% CI). Considering the two
underlying measures separately, we find a significant increase in the self-assessment of altruism and a
non-significant but economically meaningful increase in giving in the dictator game. In the dictator
game, the mean giving in the control group was around Rs. 17 out of Rs. 50, in line with behavior in
dictator games in many other settings. The treatment group on average gave an additional Rs. 1 (or
around 0.1 SD) more, consistent with greater altruism (p=0.25). The treatment group also reported a
0.19 SD greater willingness to do good without expecting anything in return (p<0.05).
Patience. Theoretically, the effect of depression on patience is ambiguous. For example, the
anhedonia often experienced in depression may reduce the pleasure of immediate consumption, thus
makingpeopleappearmorepatientwhentradingoffimmediateandfutureconsumption(Lempertand
36TheconstructionofeachvariableisdescribedinmoredetailinAppendixTableA.6. Comprehensionwashighacross
tasksasmeasuredbyasetofcomprehensionquestionsforeachtask. Weadditionallyattemptedtomeasuresusceptibility
to “default effects” with a task in which participants received one good and had the option to switch to another at a
later date. This outcome showed little variation (over 95% of participants stuck with the default). We therefore drop it
in accordance with our pre-analysis plan which specifies dropping binary outcomes if over 90% take the same action.
21

Pizzagalli, 2010). Alternatively, depression might make it difficult to attend to the future, reducing
patience (Keller et al., 2019). The expert forecasts indicate a modest belief that the HAP intervention
would increase patience, with a median forecast of a 0.12 SD increase in the patience index variable.
Our incentivized measure of patience is a “saving-a-note” task. We gave each participant a Rs.
100 bank note at the first session, and told them that if they could show the exact same note (with
matching serial number) at the second meeting, they would receive a Rs. 30 bonus. Returning the
note is a measure of participants’ patience and/or their ability to resist temptations.37 As secondary
unincentivized measures, we asked two self-assessment survey questions and a discount-parameter
elicitation using hypothetical money-earlier-or-later decisions. The survey questions asked, on a scale
of 1–10, to what extent the participant was willing “to give up something that is beneficial for you
today in order to benefit more from that in the future,” and willing “to complete tasks at the earliest,
and not leave them for later/postpone them.” The discounting elicitation uses a “ladder” design that,
through a sequence of choices between hypothetical sooner-or-later monetary amounts, finds a narrow
range for the participant’s indifference point. We elicited discounting between money today or in 12
months’ time, and between 12 and 24 months’ time.38
Table 5 Panel B shows a 0.18 SD treatment effect on the patience index—indicating higher
patience—which combines the above measures (p=0.03, q=0.05). The effect in the HAP trial is nearly
identical at 0.17 SD, and is close to the median expert forecast of 0.12 SD. While the point estimates
for nearly all the patience measures are positive, the impact on the index is largely driven by the two
self-assessments. In particular, participants are 0.24 SD more likely to state that they are willing to
give something up for future benefits (p<0.01). In contrast, we find small and insignificant impacts
on whether participants return the bank notes, and on the discounting parameters inferred from the
money-earlier-or-later questions. While 79 percent of control group participants returned the bank
note, the treatment increased this fraction by 2 percentage points (not significant). In the hypotheti-
cal discounting task, participants discount the future heavily: δ and δ are both around 0.6. They are
a b
slightly future-biased on average, with mean β equal to 1.08.39 The treatment effects on the discount
factors are small, but we cannot rule out moderate increases in patience of the order of 0.2 SD.
Risk and loss tolerance. Some scholars have argued that depression reduces risk tolerance (see
Kamstra, Kramer and Levi (2003) for a discussion). Proposed mechanisms include that depression
reduces “sensation-seeking,” which is in turn associated with risk-taking. In addition, depression is
37Wechosethistasksinceimplementingfuture-datedmonetarypaymentsovertraditionaltime-framesusedinmoney-
earlier-or-later designs was difficult to implement in this context. As with other monetary discounting tasks, behavior
in the saving-a-note task could also capture time-variation in liquidity constraints (Cohen et al., 2020).
38Fromthesechoices,wecomputepresentandfuturediscountfactorsδ andδ (underalinearutilityapproximation),
a b
aswellasapresentbiasparameterβ =δb/δa . Forthe12-versus24-monthquestion,weincreasedallmonetaryamounts
by 20 percent relative to the today versus 12-month question. The staircase design does not allow for inconsistent
choice (defined as a participant that rejects a larger amount but accepts a smaller amount). Due to an error in the
survey implementation, threemonetaryamountsinthe 12/24 monthinstrumentwere calibratedincorrectly, permitting
inconsistent responses. We find that 8 percent of participants are inconsistent, and code their values of δ and β as
b
missing.
39These estimates are comparable in magnitude to those from Bauer, Chytilová and Morduch (2012)’s study of self-
helpgroupmembersinKarnataka,India. Theyestimatemeanthree-monthdiscountratesof0.244betweenthepresent
and three months’ time, and 0.193 between 12 and 15 months’ time. These correspond to annual discount factors
δ
a
=(1/1.244)4 =0.42 and δ
b
=(1/1.193)4 =0.49. However, their estimates indicate present bias on average whereas we
find modest future bias.
22

associated with pessimism, which might make risks less attractive. Recent correlational evidence,
however, casts doubt on this hypothesis (Cobb-Clark, Dahmann and Kettlewell, 2020). Experts did
not anticipate meaningful effects of the HAP intervention on risk preferences, with a median forecast
of a 0.05 SD increase in the index of risk tolerance.
Our two incentivized measures use lottery choice lists to elicit risk and loss tolerance.40 The risk
tolerance task elicits the monetary amount Y that makes the participant indifferent between receiving
Rs. 100 for sure versus a 50-50 lottery over winning Rs. Y/Rs. 200. The smaller is Y, the more risk
the participant is willing to tolerate (and Y = 0 corresponds to the risk-neutral case). Similarly, the
loss tolerance task elicits the monetary amount Z at which the participant is willing to accept a 50-50
lottery over gaining Rs. 100/losing Rs. Z, with losses to be deducted from the participant’s show-up
fee. In this case the larger is Z the more loss-tolerant the participant is (and Z = 100 corresponds
to risk neutrality with no loss aversion). Our unincentivized measure is taken from the GPS and asks
“In general, how willing you are to choose uncertain outcomes in real life?”, answered on a 1–10 scale.
Similarly-phrased questions have been used in many other settings and have been shown to predict
real-world risky decisions well across contexts (Dohmen et al., 2011).
We find small and non-significant effects on all three measures as well as a small (0.05 SD) increase
in the overall index of risk tolerance (Table 5 Panel C). Psychotherapy increases the index measure
by a small and statistically insignificant 0.03 SD, very similar to the median expert prediction of 0.05
SD. In the risk tolerance task, the control group on average chooses Y=53. This amount is about Rs.
2 lower in the treatment group, indicating slightly higher risk tolerance (not significant). In the loss
tolerance task, the control group chooses on average Z=73, and this amount is about Rs. 1 higher in
the treatment group, indicating slightly higher loss tolerance (not significant). Consistent with these
choices, treated individuals on average assess their willingness to choose uncertain outcomes by 0.05
SD higher (not significant).
7.1 Discussion
Our findings add to the nascent literature estimating the causal effects of psychotherapy on eco-
nomic preferences. Closest to our work is Blattman, Jamison and Sheridan (2017), which shows that
CBT designed to reduce impulsive behavior successfully increased patience and reduced violent behav-
iorinapopulationofcriminally-engagedyoungmeninLiberia. Theirinterventiondifferssubstantially
fromthosewestudy, sinceitdidnottargetdepressionanddidnotimprovementalhealth. Alsorelated
is Angelucci and Bennett (2021), who show mixed evidence of pharmacological treatment of depres-
sion affecting risk tolerance.41 Therapy and pharmacological treatments for depression may, however,
operate through different mechanisms.
40The choice lists begin with the most favorable option and work toward the least favorable. We allowed multiple
switchingonthesechoicelists,andtakethefirstswitchpointastheparticipant’schoice. Ifparticipantsmadeinconsistent
choices this was pointed out to them and they were given an opportunity to reconsider. We estimate the indifference
pointasthemidpointofthelast-acceptedandfirst-rejectedoption. Iftheparticipantrejected(accepted)alloptions,we
take the first (last) value as their indifference point.
41Specifically,AngelucciandBennett(2021)findthatbeingprescribedantidepressantsdoesnotaffectalottery-based
measure of risk tolerance or self-assessed risk attitudes, similar to our findings. However, they do find evidence of
reductions in self-reported risky behaviors such willingness to ride a motorcycle without a helmet.
23

The positive effects of psychotherapy on the aggregate index measures of patience and altruism are
broadly in line with expert predictions. However, it is important to note that these effects are driven
morebychangesinself-assessmentsthanbychangesinactualexperimentalchoices. Oneinterpretation
of these findings is that therapy did not affect the extent to which people actually behaved patiently
or altruistically, but changed how they interpreted their own behavior, in line with a more robust
self-image. While patience and altruism are typically viewed as normatively desirable, the valence of
risk tolerance is less clear, which might explain the smaller effects observed for this outcome.
However, we cannot rule out moderate effects on real behaviors in line with the changed self-
assessments, especially in the case of altruism. Self-evaluations may also reflect real behavior across a
broader set of domains and a longer time-frame than captured by the experimental tasks. An alterna-
tive interpretation is thus that psychotherapy changed not just self-perceptions, but also behaviors, in
the direction of greater patience and altruism.
As with the self-confidence outcomes, the pattern of results suggest that therapy affected patience
and altruism through channels other than current levels of depression. The effects were similar in
both trials, despite only HAP showing an impact on depression.42 Moreover, a correlational analysis
reported in Appendix Table A.10 shows weak associations of current depression status with each of
these preferences.43 A mediation analysis reported in Figure A.8 confirms that changes in current
PHQ-9 scores do not explain the effects. Intriguingly, the measure of behavioral activation—being
active and engaged in pleasurable activities—is the strongest mediator of the effects on patience and
especially altruism, explaining a majority of each effect. This suggests that behavioral activation—the
focus of the therapy interventions we study–both improves mental health and independently affects
self-perceptions.
8 Work, Consumption, and Other Outcomes
We find no evidence of significant impacts of the treatments on work-related outcomes, including
survey-based measures of labor supply and employment (Table 6, Panel A) and revealed-preference
measures of willingness to take on paid work and productivity (Panel B). In line with these results, we
also find no impacts on consumption (Panel C). Finally, we find some evidence of improved sleep due
to the treatment but no impacts on other exploratory outcomes such as female empowerment, IPV, or
loneliness (Panel D).44
Labor supply and employment. Wedetectnosignificantimpactsonanyofthesurveymeasures
of labor supply and employment (Table 6 Panel A), including whether people were engaged in paid
42The most notable difference is that we do see suggestive evidence of a treatment effect in the saving-a-note task in
the THPP trial. Here, 71 percent of untreated participants saved the note, increasing by 12 percentage points among
the treated and significant at the 10 percent level.
43Whilepatienceandrisktoleranceindicesareweaklynegativelyassociatedwithcurrentdepression,altruismisinstead
weaklypositivelyassociated. Thecoefficientsforpatienceandaltruismarelessthanhalfaslargeinmagnitudeastheour
estimated treatment effects, which further goes to suggest that the treatment effects are not well-explained by changes
in contemporaneous depression.
44We attempted to measure schooling attainment of school age and adult children, and reading and writing ability of
children. We find no evidence of meaningful effects, but this is not particularly surprising because of high dispersion in
children’s ages in the sample: many were too young to be in school, or too old to be meaningfully affected.
24

work, how many hours of paid work they did in the past week, or how much they earned in the past
month. Similarly, we find no significant difference in the fraction of people who say they are available
to take on an employment opportunity. Among the unemployed, we find no difference in the number
of job search hours per week. These results are consistent with Baranov et al. (2020), who also find no
effects of psychotherapy for depression on employment in a sample of women in Pakistan. A caveat
is that, due to limited power, we cannot rule out modest improvements (or reductions). For instance,
the 95% confidence interval for effects on employment rates extends from -7 to +5 percentage points,
compared to a control-group mean of 25%.
Table 6 Panel B shows no evidence of impacts on revealed-preference measures of productivity
and willingness to take on paid work (i.e., labor supply at the margin). First, we find no evidence
of impacts on the number of bracelets made as part of the work task used to measure confidence
and belief updating (see Section 6). Since this incentivized task involves the kind of manual skills
often required in work available to our study participants, this outcome arguably provides a relevant
measure of work productivity. Second, we find no impacts of the treatment on incentivized reservation
wages—the minimum wage participants were willing to work at—when asked to make a large, fixed
number of bracelets from home (using as much time as needed), regardless of their performance in the
task. Finally, we also find no impacts on the take-up of the performance-based hiring scheme. Recall
that signing up for this hiring scheme was potentially lucrative for participants who performed above
the median in the sample. Given the treatment effects on final confidence (Table 4 Panel A), one may
have expected treatment to reduce take-up of the hiring scheme. It did not.45
Expenditures. Giventhelackofimpactsonlaborsupply,earnings,andproductivity,itisperhaps
not surprising that we observe little impact on expenditures and consumption (Table 6 Panel C).
We find no significant impacts on overall consumption or on individual categories such as food or
durable goods. We can rule out increases in monthly expenditures greater than 10 percent of control-
group levels. Improved mental health also did not translate into significant reductions in other health
expenditures, unlike in the short-run study (Patel et al., 2017; Weobong et al., 2017).
Female empowerment and IPV.Wealsofindnosignificanttreatmenteffectsonfemaleempow-
erment and intimate partner violence (Table 6 Panel D). An index of female empowerment variables
shows a positive point estimate of 0.06 SD across the entire sample, but this is not statistically signif-
icant, and few of the constituent variables show sizable effects (Appendix Table A.12). The estimated
effects on female empowerment are less precise and smaller than in Baranov et al. (2020), though we
cannot reject the effects found in their study. Similarly, while we find some suggestive evidence of
reduced intimate partner violence (IPV) in the treatment group, these estimates are not statistically
significant. Across the entire sample (restricted to female participants), the corresponding index de-
creases by 0.12 SD, driven by a significant 67 percent reduction in reported instances of forced sex,
from 9 percent to 3 percent of women (Appendix Table A.13).
45Oneinterpretationofthisresultisthatpeople’slaborsupplydecisionsareconstrainedbyotherfactorssuchassocial
normsorchildcare,thuslimitinganypotentialimpactsoftherapyonchoicesinthehiringscheme. Alternatively,people
might optimistically update their beliefs to feel good about themselves but then revert to their priors in higher-stakes
choices, as discussed in Mobius et al. (2021). We find some evidence in support of this hypothesis (Appendix Table
A.11).
25

Sleep, loneliness, and locus of control. We find a statistically significant positive effect of
0.2 SD on an index of three self-reported sleep-related variables: the number of hours slept in the
preceding night, sleep quality, and the number of hours spent in bed but not asleep (entering the index
negatively). The positive effect on the index is driven by a 16-minute increase in sleep duration per
night, and a 0.20 SD improvement in sleep quality. This provides rare evidence of an intervention
capable of improving sleep quality in developing-country settings (Bessone et al., 2021; Rao et al.,
2021). In contrast, we find no evidence of impacts on loneliness or locus of control.
8.1 Discussion
The above findings contribute to the literature studying the causal impacts of therapy on work-
related outcomes. Previous work has found evidence of short-run impacts of therapy on brief survey
measures of labor supply, particularly self-reported days of work missed (Patel et al., 2017; Lund et al.,
2010). We contribute to this evidence base by studying longer-run impacts and by using revealed-
preferencemeasuresofproductivityandlaborsupplyinadditiontosurveymeasuresofemploymentand
earnings. Ourfindingssuggestthattherapydidnothavelong-runimpactsonwork-relatedoutcomesin
this context, and we can rule out moderate-sized positive effects. We interpret our findings as showing
both a lack of real-world labor supply responses—which could be attributed to low labor demand or to
constraints on women’s work outside the home—but also no effects on willingness to take on flexible
work from home.
Thenulleffectonemploymentcontrastswiththeforecastsofexperts. Themedianexpertpredicted
a 0.12 SD increase in employment. The true empirical estimate of −0.01 SD was equal to the 13th
percentile of the expert forecasts. The median expert predicted more modest effects (+0.06 SD) on
consumption, which was close to the true empirical estimate of 0.05 SD. Ultimately, even a very
effective psychotherapy intervention on its own was not sufficient to unleash greater labor supply and
earnings and help recipients escape poverty.
9 Conclusion
We study the long-run effects of two trials of psychotherapy for depression. Most directly rele-
vant for policy, we document that the mental health benefits of the Healthy Activity Program—an
inexpensive, scalable therapy delivered by non-specialists—were remarkably persistent. Therapy in-
creased remission from depression by 13 percentage points five years after the brief intervention was
delivered. Accountingfortheselong-runimpactsfurtherincreasesestimatesofthe(already-high)cost-
effectiveness of such therapies. We calculate that being offered the HAP treatment averted 9 months
of depression on average over five years, at a cost of at most $7.33 per month of depression averted or
$206perQuality-AdjustedLifeYear. Thisresultreinforcescallsforexpandingaccesstopsychotherapy
in India and similar contexts worldwide (Singla et al., 2017).
As the supply of therapy grows in the developing world, studying potential demand-side barriers
becomes increasingly important. Low perceptions of treatment efficacy could be a barrier to seeking
treatment, possibly due to lack of familiarity. We document that receiving therapy increases people’s
26

beliefs regarding the efficacy of therapy. Future work may explore whether such changes in beliefs are
transmittedinsocialnetworksandleadtoincreaseddemandfortherapyamongpeers. Ourresultsalso
suggest that regulation and/or information interventions that help people identify effective treatments
could be beneficial.
This paper also contributes to a behavioral-science view of psychotherapy, documenting its long-
run effects on beliefs and preferences. We find that therapy durably changes recipients’ beliefs about
themselves. Itreducesextremelynegativeself-perceptionswhichareacommonsymptomofdepression.
It also increases participants’ self-assessed levels of patience and altruism. However, therapy does not
simply cause patients to see themselves more positively across the board. It also causes them to see
themselves more accurately in certain domains. When faced with a novel work opportunity, therapy
reducedoverconfidencebymakingpeoplereacttofeedbackmoreevenhandedly. Thisfindingisarguably
consistent with the theory and goals of CBT (Beck, 2020). Of course, our study only captures certain
aspects of beliefs and economic preferences, and omits many other aspects of how people perceive
themselves and the world, which future research should explore.
Finally, this paper reports that even a highly effective psychotherapy intervention that durably
reduced depression did not translate into increases in employment and earnings among low-income
adults in India. At least in this context, therapy did not prove to be a tool for long-term reductions
in poverty. Angelucci and Bennett (2021), studying pharmacotherapy in a related Indian context,
find positive mental health effects but apart from increased child human capital investment, also find
no other economic benefits. It could be that other constraints such as social norms depress women’s
work opportunities outside the household (Fletcher, Pande and Moore, 2019). Pairing mental health
treatment with other interventions might be necessary to unlock the economic benefits of improved
mentalhealth(Bossuroyetal.,2022). Yettheremarkablypersistenteffectsofpsychotherapyonmental
health, together with the short-run reductions in health expenditures documented in previous work
(Patel et al., 2017; Weobong et al., 2017), already make a strong policy case for such psychotherapy
interventions in low-income contexts.
27

References
Alarcón, Gabriela, and Erika E. Forbes. 2017. “Prosocial Behavior and Depression: a Case for
Developmental Gender Differences.” Child and Developmental Psychiatry, 4(2): 117–127.
Albert, Paul R. 2015. “Why is depression more prevalent in women?” Journal of psychiatry &
neuroscience: JPN, 40(4): 219.
Alloy, Lauren B., and Anthony H. Ahrens. 1987. “Depression and pessimism for the future:
Biased use of statistically relevant information in predictions for self versus others.” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 52(2): 366–378.
Alloy, L. B., and L. Y. Abramson. 1979. “Judgment of contingency in depressed and nondepressed
students: Sadder but wiser?” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 108(4): 441–485.
Anderson, Michael L. 2008. “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early
Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects.”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103(484): 1481–1495.
Angelucci, Manuela, and Daniel Bennett. 2021. “The Economic Impact of Depression Treatment
in India.” IZA DP No. 14393.
Baranov, Victoria, Sonia Bhalotra, Pietro Biroli, and Joanna Maselko. 2020. “Maternal
Depression, Women’s Empowerment, and Parental Investment: Evidence from a Randomized Con-
trolled Trial.” American Economic Review, 110(3): 824–59.
Barker, Nathan, Gharad T Bryan, Dean Karlan, Angela Ofori-Atta, and Christopher
Udry. 2022. “Cognitive Behavioral Therapy among Ghana’s Rural Poor Is Effective Regardless of
Baseline Mental Distress.” American Economic Review: Insights, 4(4): 527–545.
Barth, Jürgen, Thomas Munder, Heike Gerger, Eveline Nüesch, Sven Trelle, Hansjörg
Znoj, Peter Jüni, and Pim Cuijpers. 2016. “Comparative efficacy of seven psychotherapeutic
interventions for patients with depression: a network meta-analysis.” Focus, 14(2): 229–243.
Bauer, Michal, Julie Chytilová, and Jonathan Morduch. 2012. “Behavioral Foundations of
Microcredit: Experimental and Survey Evidence from Rural India.” American Economic Review,
102(2): 1118–1139.
Beard, C, KJ Hsu, LS Rifkin, AB Busch, and T Björgvinsson.2016.“ValidationofthePHQ-9
in a psychiatric sample.” Journal of Affective Disorders, 193: 267–273.
Beck, Aaron T. 1967. Depression. University of Pennsylvania Press.
Beck, Aaron T., A. John Rush, Brian F. Shaw, and Gary Emery. 1979. Cognitive Therapy
of Depression. New York: Guilford Press.
Beck, Judith S. 2020. Cognitive behavior therapy: Basics and beyond. Guilford Publications.
Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole.2002.“Self-confidenceandpersonalmotivation.” Thequarterly
journal of economics, 117(3): 871–915.
Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2016. “Mindful Economics: The Production, Consumption,
and Value of Beliefs.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(3): 141–164.
Benjamin, Daniel J. 2019. “Errors in probabilistic reasoning and judgment biases.” Handbook of
Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foundations 1, 2: 69–186.
Bessone, Pedro, GautamRao, FrankSchilbach, HeatherSchofield, andMattieToma.2021.
“The economic consequences of increasing sleep among the urban poor.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 136(3): 1887–1941.
Blanton, Hart, Brett W. Pelham, Tracy DeHart, and Mauricio Carvallo. 2001. “Overconfi-
dence as Dissonance Reduction.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 37(5): 373–385.
Blattman, Christopher, Julian C Jamison, and Margaret Sheridan. 2017. “Reducing Crime
and Violence: Experimental Evidence from Cognitive Behavioral Therapy in Liberia.” Am. Econ.
Rev., 107(4): 1165–1206.
Blattman, Christopher, Sebastian Chaskel, Julian Jamison, and Margaret Sheridan. 2022.
“Cognitive Behavior Therapy Reduces Crime and Violence over 10 Years: Experimental Evidence.”
28

Bossuroy, Thomas, Markus Goldstein, Dean Karlan, Harounan Kazianga, William Pari-
ente, Patrick Premand, Catherine Thomas, Christopher Udry, Julia Vaillant, and
Kelsey Wright. 2022. “Tackling psychosocial and capital constraints to alleviate poverty.” Nature.
Bottemanne, Hugo, Orphee Morlaas, Anne Claret, Tali Sharot, Philippe Fossati, and
Liane Schmidt. 2022. “Evaluation of Early Ketamine Effects on Belief-Updating Biases in Patients
With Treatment-Resistant Depression.” JAMA Psychiatry, 79(11): 1124.
Buser, Thomas, Leonie Gerhards, and Joël Van Der Weele. 2018. “Responsiveness to feedback
as a personal trait.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 56(2): 165–192.
Chernozhukov, Victor, Denis Chetverikov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, Christian
Hansen, and Whitney Newey. 2017. “Double/debiased/neyman machine learning of treatment
effects.” American Economic Review, 107(5): 261–65.
Chernozhukov, Victor, Denis Chetverikov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, Christian
Hansen, Whitney Newey, and James Robins. 2018. “Double/debiased machine learning for
treatment and structural parameters.” The Econometrics Journal, 21: C1–C68.
Chernozhukov, Victor, MertDemirer, EstherDuflo, andIvánFernández-Val.2020.“Generic
machine learning inference on heterogenous treatment effects in randomized experiments, with an
application to immunization data in India.”
Cobb-Clark, Deborah A., Sarah C. Dahmann, and Nathan Kettlewell. 2020. “Depression,
Risk Preferences and Risk-taking Behavior.” Journal of Human Resources, 0419–10183R1.
Cohen, Jonathan, Keith Marzilli Ericson, David Laibson, and John Myles White. 2020.
“Measuring time preferences.” Journal of Economic Literature, 58(2): 299–347.
Coutts, Alexander. 2019. “Good news and bad news are still news: Experimental evidence on belief
updating.” Experimental Economics, 22(2): 369–395.
Cronin, Christopher J., Matthew P. Forsstrom, and Nicholas W. Papageorge. 2020. “What
goodaretreatmenteffectswithouttreatment? Mentalhealthandthereluctancetousetalktherapy.”
NBER Working Paper 27711.
Cuijpers, Pim, Erica Weitz, Eirini Karyotaki, Judy Garber, and Gerhard Andersson.2015.
“The effects of psychological treatment of maternal depression on children and parental functioning:
a meta-analysis.” Eur. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry, 24(2): 237–245.
Cuijpers, Pim, FilipSmit, ErnstBohlmeijer, StevenHollon, andGerhardAndersson.2010.
“Efficacy of cognitive-behavioural therapy and other psychological treatments for adult depression:
meta-analytic study of publication bias.” The British Journal of Psychiatry, 196: 173–178.
Cuijpers, Pim, Ioana A Cristea, Eirini Karyotaki, Mirjam Reijnders, and Marcus JH
Huibers. 2016. “How effective are cognitive behavior therapies for major depression and anxiety
disorders? A meta-analytic update of the evidence.” World psychiatry, 15(3): 245–258.
Danz, David, Lise Vesterlund, and Alistair J. Wilson. 2022. “Belief Elicitation and Behavioral
Incentive Compatibility.” American Economic Review (forthcoming).
Delavande, Adeline, Xavier Giné, and David McKenzie. 2011. “Measuring subjective expecta-
tionsindevelopingcountries: Acriticalreviewandnewevidence.” Journalofdevelopmenteconomics,
94(2): 151–163.
DellaVigna, Stefano, Devin Pope, and Eva Vivalt. 2019. “Predict science to improve science.”
Science, 366(6464): 428–429.
de Quidt, Jonathan, and Johannes Haushofer. 2016. “Depression for Economists.” NBER
Working Paper 22973.
Dev, Amelia S., Don A. Moore, Sheri L. Johnson, and Karin T. Garrett. 2022. “Sadder (cid:54)=
Wiser: Depressive Realism Is Not Robust to Replication.” Collabra: Psychology, 8(1).
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, Uwe Sunde, Jürgen Schupp, and Gert G.
Wagner. 2011. “Individual Risk Attitudes: Measurement, Determinants, and Behavioral Conse-
quences.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(3): 522–550.
Eil, David, and Justin M Rao. 2011. “The Good News-Bad News Effect: Asymmetric Processing
of Objective Information about Yourself.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3(2): 114–
138.
29

Ertac, Seda. 2011. “Does self-relevance affect information processing? Experimental evidence on
the response to performance and non-performance feedback.” Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization, 80(3): 532–545.
Falk, Armin, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, Benjamin Enke, David Huffman, and Uwe
Sunde. 2018. “Global Evidence on Economic Preferences.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
133(4): 1645–1692.
Falk, Armin, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde. 2016. “The
preference survey module: A validated instrument for measuring risk, time, and social preferences.”
IZA Discussion Paper No. 9674.
Fletcher, ErinK., RohiniPande, andCharityTroyerMoore.2019.“WomenandWorkinIndia:
Descriptive Evidence and a Review of Potential Policies.” In India Policy Forum 2018. Vol. 15, , ed.
Shekhar Shah, Barry Bosworth and Karthik Muralidharan, 149–216. New Delhi:SAGE India.
Fuhr, Daniela, Benedict Weobong, Anisha Lazarus, Fiona Vanobberghen, Helen A Weiss,
Daisy Radha Singla, Hanani Tabana, Ejma Afonso, Aveena De Sa, Ethel D’Souza,
AkankashaJoshi, PriyaKorgaonkar, RevathiKrishna, PriceLeShawndra, AtifRahman,
and Vikram Patel. 2019. “Delivering the Thinking Healthy Programme for perinatal depression
through peers: an individually randomised controlled trial in India.” Lancet Psychiatry, 6: 115–127.
Furukawa, Toshi A, Stephen Z Levine, Claudia Buntrock, David D Ebert, Simon Gilbody,
Sally Brabyn, David Kessler, Cecilia Björkelund, Maria Eriksson, Annet Kleiboer, An-
nemieke van Straten, Heleen Riper, Jesus Montero-Marin, Javier Garcia-Campayo,
Rachel Phillips, Justine Schneider, Pim Cuijpers, and Eirini Karyotaki. 2021. “How can
we estimate QALYs based on PHQ-9 scores? Equipercentile linking analysis of PHQ-9 and EQ-5D.”
Evidence-Based Mental Health, 24: 97–101.
Gautham, Melur Sukumar, Gopalkrishna Gururaj, Mathew Varghese, Vivek Benegal,
Girish N Rao, Arun Kokane, Bir Singh Chavan, Pronob Kumar Dalal, Daya Ram,
Kangkan Pathak, Raj Kumar Lenin Singh, Lokesh Kumar Singh, Pradeep Sharma,
Pradeep Kumar Saha, Chellamuthu Ramasubramanian, Ritambhara Yeshwant Mehta,
Theerthankara Meethal Shibukumar, and NMHS Collaborators Group. 2020. “The Na-
tionalMentalHealthSurveyofIndia(2016): Prevalence,socio-demographiccorrelatesandtreatment
gap of mental morbidity.” International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 66(4): 361–372.
Haushofer, Johannes, Robert Mudida, and Jeremy Shapiro. 2021. “The Comparative Impact
of Cash Transfers and a Psychotherapy Program on Psychological and Economic Well-being.” IFN
Working Paper No. 1377.
Heller, Sara B, Anuj K Shah, Jonathan Guryan, Jens Ludwig, Sendhil Mullainathan, and
Harold A Pollack. 2017. “Thinking, fast and slow? Some field experiments to reduce crime and
dropout in Chicago.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(1): 1–54.
Huang, Rurui, Chunli Yan, Yumei Tian, Beimei Lei, Dongqi Yang, Dan Liu, and Jun Lei.
2020. “Effectiveness of peer support intervention on perinatal depression: A systematic review and
meta-analysis.” Journal of Affective Disorders, 276(1): 788–796.
Indu, Pillaveetil Sathyadas, Thekkethayyil Viswanathan Anilkumar, Krishnapillai Vi-
jayakumar, K.A. Kumar, P. Sankara Sarma, Saradamma Remadevi, and Chittaranjan
Andrade. 2018. “Reliability and validity of PHQ-9 when administered by health workers for de-
pression screening among women in primary care.” Asian Journal of Psychiatry, 37: 10–14.
Kamstra, Mark J, Lisa A Kramer, and Maurice D Levi. 2003. “Winter Blues: A SAD Stock
Market Cycle.” American Economic Review, 93(1): 324–343.
Keller, Arielle S, John E Leikauf, Bailey Holt-Gosselin, Brooke R Staveland, and
Leanne M Williams.2019.“Payingattentiontoattentionindepression.” Translationalpsychiatry,
9(1): 1–12.
Kessler, Ronald C, and Philip S Wang. 2009. “Epidemiology of depression.” In I. H. Gotlib & C.
L. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression. The Guilford Press., 5–22.
Kolubinski, Daniel C., Daniel Frings, Ana V. Nikčević, Jacqueline A. Lawrence, and
Marcantonio M. Spada. 2018. “A systematic review and meta-analysis of CBT interventions
based on the Fennell model of low self-esteem.” Psychiatry Research, 267: 296–305.
30

Korn, C W, T Sharot, H Walter, H R Heekeren, and R J Dolan. 2013. “Depression is
related to an absence of optimistically biased belief updating about future life events.” Psychol.
Med., 44(3): 579–592.
Köszegi, Botond. 2006. “Ego utility, overconfidence, and task choice.” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 4(4): 673–707.
Kroenke, Kurt, Robert L Spitzer, and Janet B W Williams. 2002. “The PHQ-9: a new
depression diagnostic and severity measure.” Psychiatr. Ann., 32(9): 509–515.
Kube, Tobias, Julia Anna Glombiewski, Jeremias Gall, Leslie Touissant, Thomas Gärtner,
and Winfried Rief. 2019. “How to modify persisting negative expectations in major depression?
An experimental study comparing three strategies to inhibit cognitive immunization against novel
positive experiences.” Journal of Affective Disorders, 250: 231–240.
Lee, David S.2009.“Training,Wages,andSampleSelection: EstimatingSharpBoundsonTreatment
Effects.” The Review of Economic Studies, 76(3): 1071–1102.
Lempert, Karolina M., and Diego A. Pizzagalli. 2010. “Delay discounting and future-directed
thinking in anhedonic individuals.” Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry,
41(3): 258–264.
Löwe, Bernd, Irini Schenkel, Caroline Carney-Doebbeling, and Claus Göbel.2006.“Respon-
siveness of the PHQ-9 to psychopharmacological depression treatment.” Psychosomatics, 47(1): 62–
67.
Lund, Crick, Alison Breen, Alan J Flisher, Ritsuko Kakuma, Joanne Corrigall, John A
Joska, Leslie Swartz, and Vikram Patel. 2010. “Poverty and common mental disorders in low
and middle income countries: A systematic review.” Soc. Sci. Med., 71(3): 517–528.
Lund, Crick, Kate Orkin, Marc Witte, Thandi Davies, John Walker, Johannes Haushofer,
Sarah Murray, Judy Bass, Laura Murray, and Vikram Patel.2022.“TreatingMentalHealth
Conditions Improves Labor Market and Other Economic Outcomes in Low and Middle-Income
Countries.” mimeo.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate. 2005. “CEO overconfidence and corporate investment.”
The journal of finance, 60(6): 2661–2700.
Manea, Laura, Simon Gilbody, and Dean McMillan.2012.“Optimalcut-offscorefordiagnosing
depression with the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9): a meta-analysis.” Canadian Medical
Association Journal, 184(3): E191–E196.
Maselko, Joanna, Siham Sikander, Elizabeth L Turner, Lisa M Bates, Ikhlaq Ahmad,
Najia Atif, Victoria Baranov, Sonia Bhalotra, Amina Bibi, Tayyaba Bibi, Samina Bilal,
Pietro Biroli, Esther Chung, John A Gallis, Ashley Hagaman, Anam Jamil, Katherine
LeMasters, Karen O’Donnell, Elissa Scherer, Maria Sharif, Ahmed Waqas, Ahmed
Zaidi, Shaffaq Zulfiqar, and Atif Rahman.2020.“Effectivenessofapeer-delivered,psychosocial
interventiononmaternaldepressionandchilddevelopmentat3yearspostnatal: aclusterrandomised
trial in Pakistan.” The Lancet Psychiatry, 7(9): 775–787.
McMillan, Dean, Simon Gilbody, and David Richards. 2010. “Defining successful treatment
outcome in depression using the PHQ-9: a comparison of methods.” Journal of affective disorders,
127(1-3): 122–129.
Mobius, Markus M, Muriel Niederle, Paul Niehaus, and Tanya S Rosenblat. 2021. “Man-
aging Self-Confidence: Theory and Experimental Evidence.” Management Science (forthcoming).
Moore, Don A, and Paul J Healy. 2008. “The trouble with overconfidence.” Psychological review,
115(2): 502.
Moore, Michael T, and David M Fresco. 2012. “Depressive realism: A meta-analytic review.”
Clinical psychology review, 32(6): 496–509.
Patel, Vikram, Benedict Weobong, Helen A Weiss, Arpita Anand, Bhargav Bhat,
Basavraj Katti, Sona Dimidjian, Ricardo Araya, Steve D Hollon, Michael King, Lak-
shmi Vijayakumar, A-La Park, David McDaid, Terry Wilson, Richard Velleman,
Betty R Kirkwood, and Christopher G Fairburn. 2017. “The Healthy Activity Program
(HAP), a lay counsellor-delivered brief psychological treatment for severe depression, in primary
31

care in India: a randomised controlled trial.” Lancet, 389(10065): 176–185.
Patel, Vikram, Gregory Simon, Neerja Chowdhary, Sylvia Kaaya, and Ricardo Araya.
2009. “Packages of Care for Depression in Low- and Middle-Income Countries.” PLoS Med.,
6(10): e1000159.
Patel, Vikram, Helen Weiss, Neerja Chowdhary, Smita Naik, Sulochana Pednekar,
Sudipto Chatterjee, Mary De Silva, Bhargav Bhat, Ricardo Araya, Michael King, Gre-
gory Simon, Helen Verdeli, and Betty Kirkwood. 2010. “Effectiveness of an intervention led
by lay counsellors for depressive and anxiety disorders in primary care in Goa, India (MANAS): a
cluster randomised controlled trial.” Lancet, 376(9758): 2086–2095.
Patel, Vikram, Neerja Chowdhary, Atif Rahman, and Helen Verdeli.2011.“Improvingaccess
to psychological treatments: Lessons from developing countries.” Behav. Res. Ther., 49(9): 523–528.
Patel, Vikram, Shekhar Saxena, Crick Lund, Graham Thornicroft, Florence Baingana,
Paul Bolton, Dan Chisholm, Pamela Y Collins, Janice L Cooper, Julian Eaton, et al.
2018. “The Lancet Commission on global mental health and sustainable development.” The Lancet,
392(10157): 1553–1598.
Patel, Vikram, Shuiyuan Xiao, Hanhui Chen, Fahmy Hanna, A T Jotheeswaran, Dan
Luo, Rachana Parikh, Eesha Sharma, Shamaila Usmani, Yu Yu, Benjamin G Druss,
and Shekhar Saxena. 2016. “The magnitude of and health system responses to the mental health
treatment gap in adults in India and China.” Lancet, 388(10063): 3074–3084.
Patel, V, R Araya, N Chowdhary, M King, B Kirkwood, S Nayak, G Simon, and H A
Weiss. 2008. “Detecting common mental disorders in primary care in India: a comparison of five
screening questionnaires.” Psychol. Med., 38(2): 221–228.
Prinja, Shankar, Thiagarajan Sundararaman, and V R Muraleedharan. 2020. “Cost-
effectiveness Threshold and Health Opportunity Cost: Achieving Universal Health Coverage.”
Economic and Political Weekly, 55(2): 19–23.
Rahman, Atif, Abid Malik, Siham Sikander, Christopher Roberts, and Francis Creed.
2008. “Cognitive behaviour therapy-based intervention by community health workers for mothers
with depression and their infants in rural Pakistan: a cluster-randomised controlled trial.” Lancet,
372: 902–909.
Rahman, Atif, Jane Fisher, Peter Bower, Stanley Luchters, Thach Tran, M Taghi Yasamy,
Shekhar Saxena, and Waquas Waheed. 2013. “Interventions for common perinatal mental dis-
orders in women in low- and middle-income countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis.”
Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 91: 593–601.
Rao, Gautam, Susan Redline, Frank Schilbach, Heather Schofield, and Mattie Toma.2021.
“Informing sleep policy through field experiments.” Science, 374(6567): 530–533.
Ridley, Matthew, Gautam Rao, Frank Schilbach, and Vikram Patel. 2020. “Poverty, depres-
sion, and anxiety: Causal evidence and mechanisms.” Science, 370(6522).
Russo, J Edward, and Paul JH Schoemaker. 1992. “Managing overconfidence.” Sloan
management review, 33(2): 7–17.
Sagar, Rajesh, Rakhi Dandona, Gopalkrishna Gururaj, RS Dhaliwal, Aditya Singh, Alize
Ferrari, Tarun Dua, Atreyi Ganguli, Mathew Varghese, Joy K Chakma, et al. 2020.
“The burden of mental disorders across the states of India: the Global Burden of Disease Study
1990–2017.” The Lancet Psychiatry, 7(2): 148–161.
Santomauro, Damian F, Ana M Mantilla Herrera, Jamileh Shadid, Peng Zheng, Charlie
Ashbaugh, David M Pigott, Cristiana Abbafati, Christopher Adolph, Joanne O Amlag,
Aleksandr Y Aravkin, et al. 2021. “Global prevalence and burden of depressive and anxiety
disorders in 204 countries and territories in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.” The Lancet,
398(10312): 1700–1712.
Sapiens Lab. 2021. “Mental Health Has Bigger Challenges Than Stigma.” Rapid Report.
Schwardmann, Peter, and Joel Van der Weele. 2019. “Deception and self-deception.” Nature
human behaviour, 3(10): 1055–1061.
Selten, Reinhard. 1998. “Axiomatic characterization of the quadratic scoring rule.” Experimental
32

Economics, 1(1): 43–61.
Sherman, David K., and Geoffrey L. Cohen. 2006. “The Psychology of Self-defense: Self-
Affirmation Theory.” In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology. 183–242. Elsevier.
Sikander, Siham, Anisha Lazarus, Omer Bangash, Daniela Fuhr, Benedict Weobong,
Revathi Krishna, Ikhlaq Ahmad, Helen Weiss, LeShwandra Price, Atif Rahman, and
Vikram Patel. 2015. “The Effectiveness and Cost-Effectiveness of the Peer-Delivered Thinking
Healthy Programme for Perinatal Depression in Pakistan and India: the SHARE Study Protocol for
Randomised Controlled Trials.” Trials, 16(534).
Singla, Daisy, Benedict Weobong, Abhijit Nadkarni, Neerja Chowdhary, Sachin Shinde,
Arpita Anand, Christopher Fairburn, Sona Dimijdan, Richard Velleman, Helen Weiss,
and Vikram Patel. 2014. “Improving the scalability of psychological treatments in developing
countries: An evaluation of peer-led therapy quality assessment in Goa, India.” 60(100): 53–59.
Singla, Daisy R, Brandon A Kohrt, Laura K Murray, Arpita Anand, Bruce F Chorpita,
and Vikram Patel.2017.“PsychologicalTreatmentsfortheWorld: LessonsfromLow-andMiddle-
Income Countries.” Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 13: 149–181.
Steinert, Christiane, Mareike Hofmann, Johannes Kruse, and Falk Leichsenring. 2014.
“Relapseratesafterpsychotherapyfordepression–stablelong-termeffects? Ameta-analysis.” Journal
of Affective Disorders, 168: 107–118.
Tauchmann, H. 2014. “Lee (2009) treatment-effect bounds for nonrandom sample selection.” Stata
Journal, 14(4): 884–894.
Terlizzi, E.P., and B. Zablotsky. 2020. “Mental health treatment among adults: United States,
2019.” NCHS Data Brief, 380.
The EuroQol Group. 1990. “EuroQol - a new facility for the measurement of health-related quality
of life.” Health Policy, 16(3): 199–208.
Valley, Zahir, and Lameze Abrahams. 2016. “The effectiveness of peer-delivered services in the
management of mental health conditions: a meta-analysis of studies from low-and middle-income
countries.” International Journal for the Advancement of Counselling, 38: 330–344.
Verma, Shankey, and Aditi Mishra. 2020. “Depression, anxiety, and stress and socio-demographic
correlates among general Indian public during COVID-19.” International Journal of Social
Psychiatry, 66(8): 756–762.
Weobong, Benedict, Helen A Weiss, David McDaid, Daisy R Singla, Steven D Hollon,
Abhijit Nadkarni, A-La Park, Bhargav Bhat, Basavraj Katti, and Arpita Anand et
al. 2017. “Sustained effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of the Healthy Activity Programme, a brief
psychologicaltreatmentfordepressiondeliveredbylaycounsellorsinprimarycare: 12-monthfollow-
up of a randomised controlled trial.” PLoS Med., 14(9).
WHO. 2010. “mhGAP intervention guide for mental, neurological and substance use disorders in
non-specialized health settings.” Technical documents, World Health Organization.
WHO.2015.“Thinkinghealthy: amanualforpsychosocialmanagementofperinataldepression,WHO
generic field-trial version 1.0, 2015.” Technical documents, World Health Organization.
WHO. 2017. Depression and Other Common Mental Disorders: Global Health Estimates. Geneva:
World Health Organization.
Zimmermann, Florian. 2020. “The Dynamics of Motivated Beliefs.” American Economic Review,
110(2): 337–361.
33

10 Figures and Tables
Blattman et al. 2022
Maselko et al. 2020
Baranov et al. 2020
Healthy Activity Program
Thinking Healthy Program Peer Delivered
)sDS(
noisserped
no
stceffe
tnemtaerT
5.1
1
5.
0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Time after Enrollment (years)
Figure 1: Treatment effects of HAP and THPP compared to previous work
Notes: This figure contextualizes our results on HAP and THPP with the results of previous RCTs studying the effects of psycho-
logical treatment on depression in low- and middle-income countries, focusing on peer-delivered interventions.
• The studies are primarily taken from the literature review in Singla et al. (2017), as well as meta-analyses of peer-delivered
and non-specialist interventions by Huang et al. (2020) and by Valley and Abrahams (2016).
• Weaddedfurtherstudiesthatwereconductedafterthepublicationofthosereviews. TheseRCTsinlow-andmiddle-income
countries were sourced using searches of Google Scholar and PubMed, using the search terms (“depression” OR “anxiety”)
AND(“peer-delivered” OR"peer” OR“non-specialist” OR“interpersonal” OR“volunteer”)AND(“trial” OR“randomized” OR
“random” OR “controlled” OR “experiment”) AND (“international” OR “LMIC” OR “low- and middle-income” OR “middle-
income”), and further supplemented with the METAPSY database (https://evidencebasedpsychotherapies.shinyapps.
io/metapsy/).
• Details of the papers included can be found in Appendix Table A.17. Treatment effects are converted to standardized units
to adjust for the different depression metrics used across studies.
34

1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0
ytilibaborP
evitalumuC
Panel A: CDF of PHQ−9 score in HAP at 5 years
Control
Treatment
0 5 10 15 20 25
PHQ−9 Score
1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0
ytilibaborP
evitalumuC
Panel B: CDF of PHQ−9 score in THPP at 4 years
Control
Treatment
0 5 10 15 20 25
PHQ−9 Score
Figure 2: Effects on distribution of depression symptom severity
Notes: This figure shows cdfs of PHQ-9 scores at the endline follow-up survey for HAP 5 years after treatment (Panel A) and for
THPP 4 years after treatment (Panel B). Based on Kroenke, Spitzer and Williams (2002), the PHQ-9 screening thresholds are as
follows: a score of 5 and above indicates at least mild depression, a score of 10 and above indicates at least moderate depression,
and a score of 15 and above indicates at least moderately severe depression.
35

)01≥9QHP(
desserpeD
noitcarF
001
08
06
04
02
0
Panel A: Fraction depressed over time in HAP
xxx
Control
Treatment
0 3 6 12 24 36 48 60
Months after Enrollment
)01≥9QHP(
desserpeD
noitcarF
001
08
06
04
02
0
Panel B: Fraction depressed over time in THPP
xxx
Control
Treatment
0 3 6 12 24 36 48 60
Months after Enrollment
Figure 3: Effects on depression over time
Notes: Thisfigureshowstheshareofpeoplewhoaredepressed(PHQ-9≥10)inthetreatmentandcontrolgroupsatbaselineandatthree
points in time during the study’s follow-up. The HAP trial is shown in Panel A, and the THPP trial is shown in Panel B.
• Each graph shows four data points for the respective treatment and control groups: (i) at baseline and during follow-up visits; (ii)
3 months after the intervention; (iii) 12 months (HAP) or 6 months (THPP) after the intervention; and (iv) 60 months (HAP) or
48 months (THPP) after the intervention.
• 90%ConfidenceintervalsaroundthetreatmentgroupmeansareusingstandarderrorsofregressionsofPHQ-9depressionlevelson
treatment.
• Depression prevalence at baseline is 100%, since only individuals with PHQ-9≥10 were eligible to be included in each study.
36

Notes: Thisfigureshowscontrolandtreatmentgroups’meanbeliefsabouttreatmenteffectsondepressionateachtimehorizon,alongsideestimatedtrueeffects. PanelAshowsthe
resultsofHAPparticipantpredictionsoftheHAPintervention’seffectsonremission,andPanelBshowsthesamepredictionsamongTHPPrespondentsfortheTHPPintervention.
Remission is defined as having a PHQ-9 score below 10.
• Point estimates and 90% confidence intervals for the true effects use the double machine learning approach of Chernozhukov et al. (2018).
• 90% confidence intervals on average beliefs are calculated from conventional standard errors of the mean.
• Each participant is asked, for each time horizon and for the control group and treatment group separately, out of 10 randomly selected members of that group, how many
wouldhavehadtheirdepression“reducedtohealthylevels.” Thedifferencebetweenthesebeliefsistheirimpliedbeliefaboutthetreatmenteffectonremissionfromdepression.
Participants were incentivized for accuracy.
Figure 4: Beliefs about treatment effects
37

Panel A. Overconfidence over the course of the experiment
Control group
Treatment group (90% CI)
ecnedifnocrevO
2.
51.
1.
50.
0
Initial Adjust 1 2 3 4 5
Prior Posterior after signal
Panel B. Belief updating parameters
Updating coefficients Updating outcomes
Bayesian Benchmark
1
8.
6.
4.
2.
0
2.-
Positive Negative Asymmetry Conservatism
signal (β ) signal (β ) (β - β ) (β)
H L H L
Control Treatment 90% CI
Figure 5: Effects of psychotherapy on overconfidence and belief updating
Notes: Thisfigureshowstheimpactofthetreatmentsonbeliefupdating,pooledacrossthetwoRCTs(split-sampleestimatesarereported
in Table 4). Belief updating is studied in a task where individuals report their estimated probability that they are in the top half of
performance on a work task, and then update their beliefs in response to informative but noisy signals (see Section 6).
• Panel A reports individuals’ overconfidence over the course of the experiment, defined as the difference between their reported
probability of being in the top half and a full-information benchmark probability. The full-information benchmark is calculated for
eachindividualastheirtrueprobabilityofbeinginthetophalfofarandomlyselectedgroupof10giventheirownscore,anysignals
theyhavereceiveduptothatpoint,andtheempiricaldistributionofscores. Weplotrawdataforthecontrolgroup,andconstruct
the treatment-group’s belief path with 90% confidence intervals using DML-estimated regression coefficients.
• Panel Breportsthecoefficientsfrombeliefupdatingregressions(equation(3)). β andβ measureresponsivenesstopositiveand
H L
negative signals, respectively. A Bayesian is characterized by β = β = 1. β −β is the difference between responsiveness to
H L H L
positive and negative signals, and equals 0 for a Bayesian. β¯measures responsiveness forcing the response to positive and negative
signalstobeidentical,whichequals1foraBayesianupdater. 90%confidenceintervalsareshownforthedifferencebetweencontrol
and treatment groups. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
38

Response to good news (β ) Response to bad news (β ) Asymmetry (β −β )
H L H L
elpmaS
lluF.A
sretadpU−reveN
porD.B
setadpU
roirP=roiretsoP
porD.C
setadpU
noitceriD
gnorW
porD.D
setoN
eeS.E
A B C D E A B C D E
tneiciffeoc
gnitadpu
feileB
52.1
1
57.
5.
52.
0
52.−
Control group Treatment group 90% Confidence interval
Figure 6: Belief updating coefficients using different sub-samples
Notes: ThisfiguresummarizesrobustnessoftreatmenteffectsonthebeliefupdatingoutcomesfromPanelBofFigure5,usingdifferentsubsamples. Theestimatedcoefficients
for the control group are shown in light blue and for the treatment group in dark blue. The full regression estimates are shown in Table A.8.
• Coefficients come from belief updating regressions (equation (3)). β and β measure responsiveness to positive and negative signals, respectively. A Bayesian is
H L
characterized by β = β = 1. β −β is the difference between responsiveness to positive and negative signals, and equals 0 for a Bayesian. 90% confidence
H L H L
intervalsareshownforthedifferencebetweencontrolandtreatmentgroups. Standarderrorsareclusteredattheindividuallevelastheseregressionsincludemultiple
observations for each individual.
• Sample A utilizes the primary analysis sample as shown in Figure 5 Panel B (full sample except observations with degenerate beliefs, since the likelihood ratios are
not defined in this case). Sample B drops individuals who never update their beliefs. Sample C drops individual observations where the participant did not update
(posterior equals prior). Sample D drops observations with wrong-signed updates (negative updates following good news or positive updates following bad news).
Sample E drops individuals who never update, ever update in the wrong direction, or ever report a degenerate belief (0 or 1).
39

Altruism
Anderson Index
Incentivized dictator game
Willing to do good
Patience
Anderson index
Incentivized saving a note task
Give up today for future
Complete task early
Discounting now vs 12mo.
Discounting 12 vs 24mo.
Present bias
Risk Tolerance
Anderson index
Incentivized risk tolerance task
Incentivized loss tolerance task
Choose uncertainty
−.2 0 .2 .4
Treatment effects (SDs)
Figure 7: Standardized treatment effects on altruism, patience, and risk tolerance
Notes: This figure summarises effects of treatment on preference outcomes in the full sample, plus indices of the various sub-components.
Split-sample estimates presented in Table 5.
• Alloutcomesarestandardizedtomeanzero,standarddeviationoneinthecontrolgroup. Treatmenteffectsareestimatedusingthe
double machine learning approach of Chernozhukov et al. (2018). Error bars show 90% confidence intervals.
• The first panel reports measures of altruism. “Dictator game” is the amount of money out of Rs. 50 that the participant chose to
send to another participant instead of keeping for themselves. “Willing to do good without expecting return” is a self-evaluation
measure of altruism.
• The second panel reports measures of patience. “Saving a note task” is a dummy equal to one if the participant saved a Rs. 100
banknote for one week, earning a Rs. 30 return. “Willing to give up today for future” and “Willing to complete task early” are
self-evaluation measures of patience. Discounting and present bias parameters are computed from choices over hypothetical sooner
vs.latermonetaryamounts. TheAndersonindexisconstructedexcludingthepresentbiasparameter,whichisatransformationof
two other components.
• Thefinalpanelreportsmeasuresofrisktolerance. “Risktolerance” and“Losstolerance” arecomputedfromparticipant’sswitching
pointsinincentivizedrisk/losslotterychoicetasks,withpositivenumberscorrespondingtohigherrisktoleranceandlosstolerance.
“Willing to choose uncertain outcomes” is a self-evaluation measure of risk tolerance.
40

Panel A. Treatment effects on main outcomes
PHQ9 Score
Initial Overconfidence
Patience index
Risk tolerance index
Altruism index
Consumption
Employment
-.2 0 .2
Pooled Treatment Effect (SDs)
Prediction IQR Actual pooled estimate HAP estimate
Panel B. Belief updating ratios in control and treatment groups
Control
Treatment
-.5 0 .5 1 1.5 2
Belief updating ratio
Prediction IQR Actual pooled estimate HAP estimate
Figure 8: Survey of Experts
Notes: Thisfigureshowstheresultsofthesurveyofexperts(whowereonlyaskedtoforecasttheresultsoftheHAPtrial),andhowtheir
predictions compare to the actual treatment effects found in the study.
• Panel A shows inter-quartile ranges (in navy blue), i.e., the 25th percentile, median, and 75th percentile of experts’ predictions of
treatment effects for the main outcomes of the study, and dots report the actual treatment effect found in the study: yellow dots
representthepooledestimatesandreddotsrepresentestimatesforHAPonly. AllestimatesuseDMLandarereportedinstandard
deviation units.
• Panel Bshowsexperts’predictionoftheratioofresponsivenesstonegativeandpositivesignals, βL,inthecontrolandtreatment
βH
groups respectively. Experts were asked for their predictions on a scale that ranged between 0.25 and 4.0. Since the point estimate
for β was close to 0 and negative, the true point estimates are also close to 0 and negative, and thus were outside the range of
L
what the survey allowed experts to report.
41

Table 1: Attrition and balance
Baseline (N=773) Follow-up (N=589)
Control mean ∆ Treatment Control mean ∆ Treatment
(S.D.) (S.E.) (S.D.) (S.E.)
Completed this stage 1.00 0.00 0.78 -0.05
( 0.42) ( 0.03)
Baseline PHQ-9 score 16.15 0.24 16.14 0.36
( 3.77) ( 0.21) ( 3.66) ( 0.24)
Duration of depression at baseline (weeks) 30.87 1.57 33.25 -0.09
( 95.34) ( 6.58) ( 105.36) ( 8.42)
Years between baseline and follow-up - - 4.57 0.01
( 0.73) ( 0.05)
Number of children - - 2.16 -0.01
( 1.16) ( 0.11)
Female 0.85 -0.00 0.88 -0.01
( 0.35) ( 0.02) ( 0.33) ( 0.03)
Age 36.37 -0.22 37.64 0.21
( 12.99) ( 0.72) ( 12.83) ( 0.82)
Married 0.80 -0.01 0.81 -0.01
( 0.40) ( 0.03) ( 0.39) ( 0.03)
Years of education 6.51 -0.37 6.24 -0.48
( 4.52) ( 0.34) ( 4.38) ( 0.36)
Hindu 0.78 0.01 0.79 0.03
( 0.41) ( 0.03) ( 0.41) ( 0.03)
Expected treatment efficacy 0.76 0.00 0.75 -0.02
( 0.43) ( 0.03) ( 0.43) ( 0.04)
Homemaker 0.57 0.02 0.59 -0.00
( 0.50) ( 0.03) ( 0.49) ( 0.04)
Unemployed 0.09 0.02 0.07 0.04
( 0.28) ( 0.02) ( 0.25) ( 0.02)
Employed 0.34 -0.04 0.34 -0.04
( 0.47) ( 0.03) ( 0.47) ( 0.04)
F-test 0.49 0.72
p-value 0.91 0.73
Notes: ThistablepresentscharacteristicsoftheRCTsamples,pooledacrossbothtrials. Thecharacteristicssplitbytrialarepresented
in Appendix Table A.1.
•The first two columns present baseline mean characteristics in the control group (standard deviations in parentheses) and
the difference between mean characteristics in the treatment and control groups (standard errors in parentheses) among all
participants who took part in one of the two trials.
•The last two columns present the same characteristics and differences among only those individuals who also appear in the
follow-upsurvey. F-testsfromaregressionofthetreatmentdummyonthesecharacteristicsineachsamplearepresentedatthe
bottom of the table.
•“BaselinePHQ-9score” isastandarddiagnostictestfordepression;itrangesfrom0to27,withascoregreaterthanorequalto
10 indicating at least moderate depression symptoms. The baseline score reported is the score at enrollment in the initial trial
(before the interventions).
•“Female” takes the value 1 for female participants and 0 for male participants. “Expected treatment efficacy” takes the value 1
if the participant expected the treatment to be at least “somewhat useful,” and 0 if the patient expected the treatment to be “a
littleuseful” orless. “Homemaker” takesthevalueof1ifparticipantdoesnotworkforpayoutsidethehomeandisnotsearching
for other work currently.
42

Table 2: Impacts of the treatments on depression
Full Sample HAP THPP HAP - THPP
Control mean Treatment Effect Control mean Treatment Effect Control mean Treatment Effect ∆ T.E.
(S.D.) (S.E.) (S.D.) (S.E.) (S.D.) (S.E.) [p-value]
Panel A: OLS without controls
PHQ-9 Score 7.97 −0.97** 9.10 −1.43** 5.68 −0.04 −1.40
(5.86) (0.48) (5.97) (0.61) (4.92) (0.78) [0.18]
PHQ-9<5 0.33 0.12*** 0.25 0.15*** 0.50 0.07 0.07
(0.47) (0.04) (0.43) (0.05) (0.50) (0.07) [0.38]
PHQ-9<10 0.63 0.08** 0.55 0.12** 0.78 0.00 0.12
(0.48) (0.04) (0.50) (0.05) (0.41) (0.06) [0.15]
Mood Score 6.49 0.38** 6.19 0.38 7.10 0.40 −0.02
(2.35) (0.19) (2.40) (0.24) (2.14) (0.32) [0.96]
Panel B: DML
PHQ-9 Score 7.97 −0.85* 9.10 −1.37** 5.68 0.15 −1.52
(5.86) (0.47) (5.97) (0.59) (4.92) (0.77) [0.13]
PHQ-9<5 0.33 0.11*** 0.25 0.13*** 0.50 0.07 0.06
(0.47) (0.04) (0.43) (0.05) (0.50) (0.07) [0.50]
PHQ-9<10 0.63 0.08** 0.55 0.13*** 0.78 −0.01 0.14*
(0.48) (0.04) (0.50) (0.05) (0.41) (0.06) [0.08]
Mood Score 6.49 0.39** 6.19 0.43* 7.10 0.34 0.08
(2.35) (0.19) (2.40) (0.24) (2.14) (0.31) [0.84]
N 589 395 194
Notes: This table presents estimates of the effects of the treatments on depression as measured in the follow-up study, several years after the initial interventions.
•Thefirsttwocolumnsshowtheimpactsforthefullsample,i.e.,poolingthetwotrials. Thefollowingcolumnsshowtheimpactsforthetwotrialsseparately. Oddcolumns
report control-group means, along with standard deviations in parentheses. Even columns report treatment effects along with standard errors in parentheses. The last
column reports the difference in treatment effects across the two trials, with the p-value of a test for equal treatment effects across the two trials in square brackets.
•Panel A shows estimates from OLS regressions without control variables (apart from a dummy variable for the THPP trial in the Treatment Effect columns). Panel B
reports coefficients estimated using the double machine learning approach of Chernozhukov et al. (2018), using all control variables available in the baseline data.
•The PHQ-9 score is a standard diagnostic test of depression measured on a scale from 0 to 27. A score of 10 or higher indicates at least moderate depression symptoms,
and a score of 5 or higher indicates at least mild depression symptoms. The Mood Score is a self-reported measure of happiness on a scale from 1 to 10, averaged across
three days.
•The bottom row shows the sample sizes for PHQ-9 Score related variables. Sample sizes for the Mood Score are 578 (full sample), 387 (HAP), and 191 (THPP),
respectively.
43

Table 3: Impacts on beliefs about treatment effects
Full Sample HAP THPP
Control Mean Treatment Effect Control Mean Treatment Effect Control Mean Treatment Effect
S.E. S.E. S.E. S.E. S.E. S.E.
Panel A: Remission after 3 months
True Effect (N=711) 0.2*** 0.25*** 0.1**
(0.03) (0.04) (0.05)
Participant Beliefs (N=450) 0.12 0.0 0.1 -0.01 0.13 0.01
(0.01) (0.02) (0.02) (0.03) (0.02) (0.03)
p-value (control group=true effect) [0.01] [<0.01] [0.52]
p-value (treatment group=true effect) [0.02] [<0.01] [0.39]
Panel B: Remission after 6 months/1 year
True Effect (N=699) 0.11*** 0.16*** 0.03
(0.03) (0.05) (0.04)
Participant Beliefs (N=450) 0.06 0.1*** 0.02 0.11*** 0.1 0.09***
(0.01) (0.02) (0.02) (0.03) (0.02) (0.03)
p-value (control group=true effect) [0.11] [0.01] [0.11]
p-value (treatment group=true effect) [0.16] [0.61] [<0.01]
Panel C: Remission after 4/5 years
True Effect (N=589) 0.08** 0.13** -0.01
(0.04) (0.05) (0.06)
Participant Beliefs (N=450) 0.07 0.08*** 0.07 0.07** 0.08 0.09**
(0.01) (0.02) (0.02) (0.03) (0.02) (0.04)
p-value (control group=true effect) [0.8] [0.23] [0.05]
p-value (treatment group=true effect) [0.04] [0.95] [<0.01]
Notes: This table reports estimates of participants’ beliefs of the treatment effects on depression. We report estimated treatment effects on true remission from depression
(PHQ-9 < 10), and participants’ beliefs of these treatment effects. Estimation uses the double machine learning approach of Chernozhukov et al. (2018).
•Participants are asked, separately for the treatment group and the control group, out of 10 randomly selected individuals, how many would have had their depression
“reduced to healthy levels.” We use their answers to construct their implied belief about the treatment effect on remission from depression. HAP participants are asked
about the effects of HAP; THPP participants are asked about the effects of THPP.
•For each time horizon, we report (i) true (estimated) treatment effects; (ii) the control group’s average beliefs of these treatment effects; and (iii) the treatment effect on
these beliefs, i.e., the difference between treatment and control group’s beliefs of treatment effects; and (iv) p-values corresponding to tests of whether mean beliefs of
treatment and control participants, respectively, equal the “true” estimated effect.
•Appendix Table A.5 expands this table by presenting the raw beliefs about outcomes in the control and treatment groups.
44

Table 4: Impacts on confidence and belief updating
Full Sample HAP THPP
Controlmean TreatmentEffect Controlmean TreatmentEffect Controlmean TreatmentEffect
(S.E.) (S.E.) (S.E.) (S.E.) (S.E.) (S.E.)
[p-values]{q-values} [p-values]{q-values} [p-values]{q-values}
Panel A. Overconfidence
InitialOverconfidence 0.13 -0.03 0.22 -0.02 -0.04 -0.04
(0.02) (0.03) (0.03) (0.04) (0.04) (0.05)
[0.42]{0.43} [0.64]{0.64} [0.50]{0.50}
FinalOverconfidence 0.16 -0.08** 0.23 -0.07* 0.02 -0.09
(0.02) (0.03) (0.03) (0.04) (0.04) (0.06)
[0.02]{0.05} [0.11]{0.22} [0.13]{0.25}
N 576 385 191
Panel B. Belief-updating coefficients
ResponsetoGoodNews(β ) 0.73 -0.21** 0.73 -0.22* 0.67 -0.20
H
(0.08) (0.10) (0.10) (0.13) (0.10) (0.14)
[0.03]{0.07} [0.09]{0.18} [0.15]{0.31}
ResponsetoBadNews(β ) -0.09 0.06 -0.13 0.03 -0.03 0.11
L
(0.06) (0.09) (0.08) (0.11) (0.07) (0.12)
[0.51]{0.51} [0.78]{0.78} [0.35]{0.35}
Panel C. Asymmetry and conservatism
Asymmetry(β −β ) 0.82 -0.27* 0.85 -0.25 0.69 -0.32 H L
(0.12) (0.15) (0.15) (0.19) (0.14) (0.21)
[0.08]{0.16} [0.20]{0.29} [0.12]{0.25}
Conservatism(β¯) 0.29 -0.06 0.27 -0.07 0.29 -0.02
(0.04) (0.05) (0.05) (0.07) (0.06) (0.08)
[0.30]{0.40} [0.29]{0.29} [0.80]{0.80}
N 2620 1715 905
Notes: This table reports treatment effects on self-confidence and belief updating. Table A.6 presents more details on the construction of each outcome.
•Panel A uses the double machine learning approach of Chernozhukov et al. (2018). Panels B and C use the belief-updating regression specification (3). “Control mean”
and “Treatment Effect” columns report standard errors in parentheses.
•Starsrefertounadjustedtwo-sidedp-valuesatthresholds0.1and0.05respectively. Unadjustedp-valuesarereportedinsquarebracketsandFalseDiscoveryRate-adjusted
q-values in curly brackets. Multiple testing adjustments correct across outcomes within each panel separately.
•PanelAreportseffectsonoverconfidence. “InitialOverconfidence” equalstheparticipant’sinitialbeliefabouttheirprobabilityofbeingintheupperhalfofperformancein
theirgroupoftenpeople,minusthefull-informationbenchmark,computedassuminggroupsdrawnfromthepopulationperformancedistribution. “FinalOverconfidence”
equals the participant’s belief after observing five signals, minus the Bayesian posterior given the full-information benchmark and the observed signals.
•Panel B reports belief updating coefficients, which measure the change in the posterior likelihood ratio in response to signals, relative to the Bayesian benchmark. β
H
measures the response to good news, and β the response to bad news. Bayesian updating implies β =1, and β =1.
L H L
•PanelCreportstransformationsofthebeliefupdatingcoefficients. “Asymmetry” measuresthedifferencebetweentheresponsetogoodandbadnews. Bayesianupdating
implies β −β = 0. “Conservatism” measures the average responsiveness to news, forcing the coefficients on good and bad news to be identical. Bayesian updating
H L
implies β¯=1.
45

Table 5: Patience, risk tolerance, and altruism
FullSample HAP THPP
Controlmean TreatmentEffect Controlmean TreatmentEffect Controlmean TreatmentEffect
(S.D.) (S.E.) (S.D.) (S.E.) (S.D.) (S.E.)
[p-values]{q-values} [p-values]{q-values} [p-values]{q-values}
PanelA:Altruism
Andersonindex 0.00 0.21** 0.00 0.25** 0.00 0.16
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.14)
[0.01]{0.04} [0.02]{0.05} [0.27]{0.40}
Amountgivenawayindictatorgame 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.13 0.00 0.05
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.14)
[0.25]{0.69} [0.20]{0.72} [0.72]{0.93}
Willingtodogoodwithoutexpectingreturn 0.00 0.19** 0.00 0.20* 0.00 0.19
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.13)
N 562 379 183
PanelB:Patience
Andersonindex 0.00 0.18** 0.00 0.17* 0.00 0.27*
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.15)
[0.03]{0.05} [0.08]{0.12} [0.09]{0.27}
Notesavedinsaving-a-notetask 0.00 0.06 0.00 -0.05 0.00 0.26*
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.11) (1.00) (0.14)
[0.52]{0.69} [0.66]{0.72} [0.08]{0.30}
Willingtogiveuptodayforfuture 0.00 0.24*** 0.00 0.33*** 0.00 0.07
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.14)
Willingtocompletetaskearly(notdelay) 0.00 0.08 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.04
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.15)
Discountingδaweight: todayvs12months 0.00 0.07 0.00 0.09 0.00 0.02
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.15)
Discountingδbweight: 12monthsvs24months 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.05
(1.00) (0.09) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.16)
Presentbiasβ: δa/δb 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.07
(1.00) (0.09) (1.00) (0.11) (1.00) (0.17)
N 562 379 183
PanelC:Risktolerance
Andersonindex 0.00 0.05 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.11
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.14)
[0.52]{0.52} [0.78]{0.79} [0.45]{0.45}
Risktolerance 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.08 0.00 0.01
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.14)
[0.48]{0.69} [0.42]{0.72} [0.93]{0.93}
Losstolerance 0.00 0.01 0.00 -0.04 0.00 0.11
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.14)
[0.90]{0.90} [0.72]{0.72} [0.46]{0.92}
Willingtochooseuncertainoutcomes 0.00 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.13
(1.00) (0.09) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.15)
N 562 379 183
Notes: Thistablereportstreatmenteffectsonpreferencemeasures. SeeTableA.6formoredetailontheconstructionofeachoutcome.
•All outcomes are standardized to mean zero, standard deviation 1 in the control group. All estimates use the double machine
learningapproachofChernozhukovetal.(2018). “Controlmean” columnsreportstandarddeviationsinparentheses. “Treatment
Effect” columns report standard errors in parentheses.
•Stars refer to unadjusted two-sided p-values at thresholds 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively. Unadjusted p-values are reported in
square brackets and False Discovery Rate-adjusted q-values in curly brackets. Multiple testing corrections correct across two
distinct sets of outcomes. First, the three index outcomes: patience, risk tolerance, and altruism. Second, the set of revealed-
preference outcomes (which are sub-components of the index measures) “Saving a Note,” “Risk Aversion,” “Loss Aversion,”
“DictatorGame,” sincethesearetheprimaryoutcomesspecifiedinourpre-analysisplan. Eachpanelreportsaninversecovariance
weighted index measure over the sub-components reported in that panel (Anderson, 2008).
•PanelAreportsmeasuresofaltruism. “Dictatorgame” iscomputedfromtheamountofmoneyoutofRs.50thattheparticipant
chose to send to another participant instead of keeping for themselves. “Willing to do good without expecting return” is a self-
evaluation measure of altruism.
•Panel B reports measures of patience. “Note saved in saving a note task” records whether the participant saved a Rs. 100
banknote for one week, earning a Rs. 30 return. “Willing to give up today for future” and “Willing to complete task early” are
self-evaluationmeasuresofpatience. Discountingandpresentbiasparametersarecomputedfromchoicesoverhypotheticalsooner
vs.latermonetaryamounts. TheAndersonindexisconstructedexcludingthepresentbiasparameter,whichisatransformation
of two other components.
•Panel Creportsmeasuresofrisktolerance. “Risktolerance” and“Losstolerance” arebasedontheparticipant’sswitchingpoint
inincentivizedrisk/losslotterychoicetasks,alignedsothatpositivenumberscorrespondtohigherrisktoleranceandhigherloss
tolerance. “Willing to choose uncertain outcomes” is a self-evaluation measure of risk tolerance.
46

Table 6: Impacts on employment, productivity, and expenditures
FullSample HAP THPP
Controlmean TreatmentEffect Controlmean TreatmentEffect Controlmean TreatmentEffect
(S.D.) (S.E.) (S.D.) (S.E.) (S.D.) (S.E.)
PanelA:Survey-basedmeasuresoflaborsupplyandemployment
Engagedinworkinthelastweek 0.25 -0.01 0.27 -0.01 0.21 -0.03
(0.43) (0.03) (0.44) (0.04) (0.41) (0.06)
Workhoursinthelastweek 5.14 0.67 6.31 -0.35 2.76 2.03
(13.91) (1.20) (15.71) (1.61) (8.80) (1.68)
Earningsinthepastmonth(PPP) 83.43 3.78 98.09 -6.96 53.63 27.73
(230.13) (16.50) (263.82) (21.80) (134.86) (22.90)
Availabletotakeonanemploymentopportunity 0.82 0.04 0.78 0.07* 0.91 0.01
(0.39) (0.03) (0.42) (0.04) (0.29) (0.05)
Jobsearchhoursperweek(amongunemployed) 0.78 0.14 0.73 0.32 0.85 -0.18
(2.77) (0.27) (2.63) (0.36) (3.02) (0.39)
N 557 375 182
PanelB:Revealed-preferencemeasuresoflaborsupplyandproductivity
Reservationwage(PPPtomake1000bracelets) 64.17 3.14 65.26 5.57 62.01 -3.09
(46.21) (3.70) (47.55) (4.57) (43.57) (6.23)
Appliedforability-basedcontract 0.63 0.01 0.62 0.02 0.64 0.01
(0.48) (0.04) (0.49) (0.05) (0.48) (0.07)
Braceletsmadeintenminutes 5.04 -0.01 4.68 -0.08 5.76 0.10
(1.52) (0.11) (1.42) (0.13) (1.44) (0.19)
N 576 385 191
PanelC:Expenditures
Totalmonthlyexpenditure(PPP) 1013.27 -17.21 977.41 43.52 1086.50 -119.20
(819.22) (69.40) (866.24) (94.80) (712.35) (86.10)
Food 325.39 -17.54 288.20 -7.57 401.32 -37.69
(202.44) (15.80) (186.97) (18.30) (212.40) (29.70)
Durablegoods 153.34 24.52 172.07 49.59 115.08 -21.33
(364.84) (36.20) (418.48) (52.80) (214.60) (26.20)
Medical 168.16 -9.90 165.94 12.59 172.69 -46.30
(320.25) (33.50) (328.47) (45.70) (304.43) (35.80)
Other 366.39 -11.41 351.20 -9.39 397.42 -13.86
(303.96) (25.60) (298.44) (32.70) (314.25) (40.70)
N 558 376 182
PanelD:Indicesofotheroutcomes
Femaleempowerment 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.19 0.00 -0.13
(1.00) (0.09) (1.00) (0.13) (1.00) (0.14)
Intimatepartnerviolence(IPV) 0.00 -0.12 0.00 -0.13 0.00 -0.11
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.12) (1.00) (0.10)
Sleep 0.00 0.20** 0.00 0.20* 0.00 0.25*
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.15)
Loneliness 0.00 -0.08 0.00 -0.13 -0.00 -0.03
(1.00) (0.09) (1.00) (0.11) (1.00) (0.15)
Locusofcontrol 0.00 0.04 0.00 -0.02 0.00 0.19
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.14)
N 566 378 188
Notes: Thistablereportstreatmenteffectsonlabormarketoutcomes(PanelsAandB),householdconsumption(PanelC),andindices
of other outcomes. All estimates use the double machine learning approach of Chernozhukov et al. (2018).
•Panel Ashowssurveymeasuresoflabormarketoutcomes. “Engagedinworkinthelastweek” countsthoseunemployeddueto
disability(N=29)asnotworking. “Workhoursinthelastweek” askedofeveryone,andcountsthoseunemployedas0. “Earnings
inthepastmonth” askedofeveryone,thosewhoareunemployedbutwereemployedinthelastthreemonthshavetheirmonthly
earnings averaged over the three months. “Available to take employment opportunity” is the proportion of individuals available
to take up wage paying employment if an opportunity they were interested in were to arise in the next 4 months. “Job search
hours per week” are conditional on unemployment, with sample sizes of N=393 (pooled sample), N=250 (HAP), and N=143
(THPP).
•Panel B shows revealed-preference measures of work-related outcomes: (i) participant’s reservation wage for the employment
contractthatisofferedtoeveryoneregardlessofperformance(pricetomake1000braceletsonowntime);(ii)whetheraparticipant
chosetoapplyforthe“ability-based” employmentcontract(pre-specifiedasourprimarylabormarketoutcome). (iii)numberof
bracelets made in 10 minutes, a measure of productivity;
•Panel C shows survey measures of household expenditures. Monthly consumption measurement is assessed using conversion
to USD at purchasing power parity, at a rate of 21.107 rupees/dollar, from the OECD 2019 USD/IND PPP Index. Medical
expenditureincludesbothinpatientandoutpatientmedicalexpenses. Otherconsumptioniscalculatedasresidualtotalconsump-
tion after subtracting food, medical expenditure, and durable goods, and includes items like phone costs, fuel, power, tuition,
transportation, ceremonies, toiletries, and taxes.
•Panel Dshowsindicesofotheroutcomes,whichareshowninmoredetailintheappendix: FemaleEmpowerment(TableA.12);
Intimate Partner Violence (Table A.13); and Sleep, Loneliness, and Locus of Control (Table A.14).
47

A Appendix A: Supplementary Figures and Tables
Figure A.1: Trial Flow Diagram - HAP
Assessed for baseline eligibility (n= 146,661)
Ineligible (n= 112,355)
Eligible for screening (n= 34,306)
Refused screen (n= 2,418)
Screened with PHQ-9 (n= 31,888)
Screen negative (n= 31,040)
Other ineligible comorbidities, e.g. harmful drinking (n= 63)
Screen positive (n= 785)
PHQ-9>14 for HAP
Declined to participate or later withdrew
consent (n= 292)
Consented and randomized to baseline intervention (n= 493)
Assigned treatment group (n= 245) Assigned control group (n= 248)
First wave follow-up – 3mo. (n= 230) First wave follow-up – 3mo. (n= 236)
Second wave follow-up (n= 218) Second wave follow-up (n= 229)
1 year for HAP 1 year for HAP
Eligible for long-term follow-up (n= 245) Eligible for long-term follow-up (n= 248)
Died (n= 6) Died (n= 11)
Migrated (n= 7) Migrated (n= 4)
Not reached (n= 17) Not reached (n= 19)
Reached and declined (n= 24) Reached and declined (n= 10)
Interviewed in long-term follow-up (n= 191) Interviewed in long-term follow-up (n= 204)
5 years for HAP 5 years for HAP
Notes: This table displays the sample sizes and the trial flow chart for the HAP baseline as well as the follow-up studies. Full trial
flow charts for the first waves are available in Patel et al. (2017); Weobong et al. (2017).
48

Figure A.2: Trial Flow Diagram - THPP
Assessed for baseline eligibility (n= 118,260)
Ineligible (n= 111,851)
Eligible for screening (n= 6,409)
Refused screen (n= 40)
Screened with PHQ-9 (n= 6,369)
Screen Negative (n= 6,036)
Screen positive (n= 333)
PHQ-9>9 for THPP
Declined to participate or later withdrew
consent (n= 53)
Consented and randomized to baseline intervention (n= 280)
Assigned treatment group (n= 140) Assigned control group (n= 140)
First wave follow-up – 3mo. (n= 123) First wave follow-up – 3mo. (n= 122)
Second wave follow-up (n= 122) Second wave follow-up (n= 130)
6 months for THPP 6 months for THPP
Eligible for long-term follow-up (n= 140) Eligible for long-term follow-up (n= 140)
Died (n= 1) Died (n= 1)
Migrated (n= 18) Migrated (n= 7)
Not reached (n= 20) Not reached (n= 20)
Reached and declined (n= 8) Reached and declined (n= 11)
Interviewed in long-term follow-up (n= 93) Interviewed in long-term follow-up (n= 101)
4 years for THPP 4 years for THPP
Notes: This table displays the sample sizes and the trial flow chart for the THPP baseline as well as the follow-up studies. Full trial
flow charts for the first waves are available in Fuhr et al. (2019).
49