NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE LONG-RUN EFFECTS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY ON DEPRESSION, BELIEFS,
AND ECONOMIC OUTCOMES
Bhargav Bhat
Jonathan de Quidt
Johannes Haushofer
Vikram H. Patel
Gautam Rao
Frank Schilbach
Pierre-Luc P. Vautrey
Working Paper 30011
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30011
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2022
We dedicate this paper to our coauthor Bhargav Bhat, who passed away during the course of this
work. We thank our entire field team in Goa for excellent research assistance, especially Siddhant
Gokhale, Advait R. Aiyer, Gunjita Gupta, and Anahita Karandikar. We thank our research
managers at the Behavioral Development Lab, Adrien Pawlik, and Erik Hausen. We thank Ralph
Ignacio Lawton, Hongyuan Xia, Zhangchi Ma, Haonan Ye, Kartik Vira, and Sejal Aggarwal for
research assistance with the data analysis. We thank Benedict Weobong for his early support of
our project. We thank all our study participants for their time and patience. We received IRB
approval from Princeton. The experiment was pre-registered on the AEA registry, number
AEARCTR-0003823. We gratefully acknowledge funding from the Weiss Family Program Fund
for Research in Development Economics, the Mind Brain Behavior Initiative at Harvard, the
Dean’s Fund at Harvard, the SHASS Research Fund at MIT, the Pershing Square Venture Fund
for Research on the Foundations of Human Behavior, and Princeton University. de Quidt
acknowledges financial support from Handelsbanken’s Research Foundations (grant BF17-0003).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w30011.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Bhargav Bhat, Jonathan de Quidt, Johannes Haushofer, Vikram H. Patel, Gautam Rao,
Frank Schilbach, and Pierre-Luc P. Vautrey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Long-Run Effects of Psychotherapy on Depression, Beliefs, and Economic Outcomes
Bhargav Bhat, Jonathan de Quidt, Johannes Haushofer, Vikram H. Patel, Gautam Rao, Frank
Schilbach, and Pierre-Luc P. Vautrey
NBER Working Paper No. 30011
May 2022
JEL No. D03,D91,I15,O12
ABSTRACT
We revisit two clinical trials that randomized depressed adults in India (n=775) to a brief course
of psychotherapy or a control condition. Four to five years later, the treatment group was 11
percentage points less likely to be depressed than the control group. The more effective
intervention averted 9 months of depression on average over five years and cost only $66 per
recipient. Therapy changed people’s beliefs about themselves in three ways. First, it reduced their
likelihood of seeing themselves as a failure or feeling bad about themselves. Second, when faced
with a novel work opportunity, therapy reduced over-optimistic belief updating in response to
feedback and thus reduced overconfidence. Third, it increased self-assessed levels of patience and
altruism. Therapy did not increase levels of employment or consumption, possibly because of
other constraints on employment in the largely female study sample.
Bhargav Bhat Gautam Rao
Sangath Department of Economics
Porvorim, Goa Harvard University
India 403501 Littauer M-30
Cambridge, MA 02138
Jonathan de Quidt and NBER
Institute for International Economic Studies grao@fas.harvard.edu
Stockholm University
106 91 Stockholm Frank Schilbach
Sweden MIT Department of Economics, E52-560
jonathan.dequidt@iies.su.se The Morris and Sophie Chang Building
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Johannes Haushofer Cambridge, MA 02139
Department of Economics and NBER
Stockholm University fschilb@mit.edu
Universitetsvägen 10 A
Stockholm 106 91 Sweden Pierre-Luc P. Vautrey
and Busara Center for Behavioral MIT Department of
Economics, Nairobi, Kenya EconomicsBuilding E52-300
and also NBER 50 Memorial Drive
johannes.haushofer@ne.su.se Cambridge, MA 02142
vautrey@mit.edu
Vikram H. Patel
The Pershing Square Professor of Global Health
Department of Global Health and Social Medicine
Harvard Medical School
vikram_patel@hms.harvard.edu

1 Introduction
Psychotherapy aims to treat psychological disorders by changing dysfunctional beliefs, thoughts,
and behaviors. It is effective in treating common mental-health conditions such as depression and
anxiety (Barth et al., 2016; Cuijpers et al., 2016). Psychotherapy is widely used in the rich world:
nearly 10 percent of US adults received some form of therapy from a mental-health professional in
2019 (Terlizzi and Zablotsky, 2020). Simplified forms of psychotherapy have been developed to fill
the enormous treatment gaps for mental illness in low-income countries (Patel et al., 2009, 2018).
Administered by trained non-specialists at low cost, these therapies have been shown to cause sizable
short-run improvements in mental health across a variety of low-income settings (Singla et al., 2017).
Thispaperstudiesthelong-runeffectsofpsychotherapyonmentalhealth,behavioralandeconomic
outcomesinalow-incomesetting. Weaimtofillthreegapsintheliterature. First,littleisknownabout
whether the effects of psychotherapy on depression persist beyond the three to twelve months typically
documented in the literature (Figure 1).1 Second, by measuring economic beliefs and preferences
using methods from experimental economics, we provide a behavioral-science view of the effects of
psychotherapy (Blattman, Jamison and Sheridan, 2017; Heller et al., 2017). Third, while poor mental
health is associated with lower income, it is unclear whether psychotherapy increases economic well-
being in the long run, and can thus be a tool to reduce poverty (Ridley et al., 2020).
We revisit participants from two psychotherapy RCTs in India, four to five years after the original
trials. In both studies, participants who had screened positive for depression—the world’s leading
cause of disability (Friedrich, 2017)—were randomized into receiving a brief course of psychotherapy
or to a control condition. Therapy was delivered by non-specialist counselors and cost under $70 per
recipient to deliver. The interventions primarily employed ‘behavioral activation’, teaching patients
the relationship between their activities and mood, and seeking to increase mood-improving activities.
We successfully locate and interview 76 percent of participants—589 out of 775—from the two trials.2
To quantify the extent to which our findings might shift existing scientific understanding, we asked
234 experts on economics and mental health to forecast the main findings of the larger of the two trials
via the Social Science Prediction Platform (DellaVigna, Pope and Vivalt, 2019).
Ourfirstsetofresultsconcernsthelong-termeffectsofpsychotherapyonmentalhealth. Onaverage
across the two trials, the brief courses of psychotherapy led to sustained reductions in depression. We
measured symptoms of depression using the PHQ-9 questionnaire, a standard and locally-validated
screening tool also used in the original trials. Pooling the two trials, the treatment group had 0.15
standarddeviations(SD)lowerPHQ-9scorescomparedtothecontrolgroup(p=0.08). Usingstandard
diagnostic cutoffs in PHQ-9 scores, we find 8 to 11 percentage points lower incidence of mild and
moderate depression in the treatment group, respectively (p<0.01 and p=0.03). Decomposing the
PHQ-9 improvements, we see significantly lower frequency of specific symptoms such as feeling bad
about oneself and having a poor appetite. Participants’ mood also improved, by 0.17 SD (p=0.04).
The long-run improvement in mental health is entirely driven by one of the two interventions: the
1Exceptions are Baranov et al. (2020) and Maselko et al. (2020), which study the effects of psychotherapy to reduce
maternal depression seven and three years after treatment respectively.
2Attrition and baseline characteristics are balanced across treatment and control groups for both trials.
1

HealthyActivityProgram(HAP),whichdelivered6to8sessionsoftherapytoadultswithmoderately-
severedepression(N=495, Pateletal.,2016). TheHAPinterventionreducesdepressionsymptomsfive
years later by 0.23 SD (p=0.02) and incidence of both mild and moderate depression by 13 percentage
points (p<0.01). This effect equals the 91st percentile of the expert predictions, implying that a vast
majorityofexperts—includingmental-healthprofessionals—under-estimatethelong-runmental-health
effects (despite being informed about the short-run effects). We calculate that treated participants
experienced 9 fewer months of depression (with PHQ-9≥10) over the five years since enrollment.
Incontrast,theThinkingHealthyProgramPeer-Delivered(THPP)intervention—deliveredtopreg-
nant women with lower (moderate) levels of depression—has no detectable long-run effects on depres-
sion (N=280). This finding is consistent with small short-run effects reported in Fuhr et al. (2019)
after our data collection began.3 The control group in the THPP trial shows high rates of spontaneous
recovery, leaving little room for further reductions in depression.4
To study participants’ views of therapy, we elicit their quantitative beliefs about the treatment
effectsoftherapy,withincentivesforaccurateguesses. Onaverage,experiencingtreatmentsignificantly
increases participants’ beliefs regarding treatment efficacy. This suggests that making psychotherapy
more widely available might increase perceived effectiveness and demand for it from the low levels
documented in the literature (Cronin, Forsstrom and Papageorge, 2020; Sapiens Lab, 2021). A caveat
is that we find similar effects on perceived efficacy in both trials. Individual patients may not be able
to distinguish effective from ineffective treatments, presumably because it is difficult to disentangle
treatment effects from natural improvements over time.
We next turn to the effect of therapy on how people form beliefs about themselves, specifically,
their beliefs about their ability and performance relative to others. Such beliefs have been shown to
affect important economic decisions (Russo and Schoemaker, 1992; Malmendier and Tate, 2005), with
widespreadexistenceofbothover-andunder-confidence(MooreandHealy,2008).5 Theexpectedeffect
ofpsychotherapyonself-confidenceisambiguous. Ontheonehand, therapyseekstomakepatientssee
themselves in a more realistic light as having both strengths and weaknesses (Beck, 2020). If therapy
causes patients to have a more robust self-image—as evidenced by the significant reductions in feeling
bad about oneself or feeling like a failure reported in the PHQ-9 questionnaire—treated participants
might have a reduced psychological need for overconfidence in a specific domain (Blanton et al., 2001;
Sherman and Cohen, 2006; Kolubinski et al., 2018). These mechanisms predict the treatment group
3ThesmalleffectsofTHPPinFuhretal.(2019)resemblefindingsfromasimilartrialevaluatingTHPPinPakistan
(Maselko et al., 2020). In contrast, THP—of which THPP is a greatly simplified version delivered by peers—has been
found effective in several studies, e.g. Baranov et al. (2020).
4AsarguedinFuhretal.(2019),thehighrateofremissioninthecontrolgroupmaybeexplainedbylowerdepression
severityatrecruitmentinthetrial. THPPusedaneligibilitycriterionofmoderatedepression(PHQ-9≥10),comparedto
moderately-severedepression(PHQ-9≥15)intheHAPtrial. Moreseveredepressionislesslikelytoexhibitspontaneous
remission. Perinatal depression may also be more likely than other kinds of depression to exhibit remission due to its
clearly circumscribed environmental trigger (pregnancy and childbirth).
5Self-confidence may also directly affect psychological well-being (Köszegi, 2006), motivation (Bénabou and Tirole,
2002),andtaskperformance(SchwardmannandVanderWeele,2019). Aninfluentialliteraturehasstudiedhowpeople
‘manage’theirself-confidence,tradingoffthebenefitsofhigherself-confidenceagainstthecostofinaccuratebeliefs. See
e.g.,EilandRao(2011);Zimmermann(2020);Mobiusetal.(2021);Coutts(2019);Buser,GerhardsandVanDerWeele
(2018); Ertac (2011). Not all studies find asymmetries in the direction of optimism and some find the opposite, see
Benjamin (2019) for discussion.
2

to have more accurate beliefs about their specific abilities relative to others. On the other hand,
an influential literature on ‘depressive realism’ has posited that depression is associated with more
realistic, less overconfident beliefs (Alloy and Abramson, 1979), although empirical evidence for this
hypothesis is mixed (Moore and Fresco, 2012; Korn et al., 2014). In this view, psychotherapy might
induce overconfidence via reduced depression.
To measure self-confidence, we use a lab-experimental paradigm developed by Mobius et al. (2021).
After completing a novel paid work task, participants are asked to assess their performance relative
to other study participants. Specifically, we elicit their belief about the probability they performed in
the top half of a randomly-formed group of ten. They are then given noisy feedback (signals) on their
relative standing and, after each signal, we re-elicit their beliefs. This allows us to measure how they
update their beliefs in response to positive and negative signals, relative to a fully rational (Bayesian)
benchmark. The median expert predicted that control-group participants, who have high rates of
depression, would update their beliefs equally to positive and negative feedback—consistent with the
idea of depressive realism. They further predicted that therapy causes patients to put greater weight
on positive feedback than negative feedback, thus becoming more overconfident.
Contrary to expert predictions, we find substantial over-confidence and optimistic belief updating
in the control group, despite high rates of depression. Prior to receiving any feedback, control-group
participants overestimate their probability of being in the top half in performance by 13 percentage
points (standard error, s.e.=2 percentage points). When given feedback on their performance, they
then update their beliefs optimistically and become even more overconfident: on average, they weight
noisy positive signals at 73 percent (s.e.=8 percent) of the Bayesian benchmark, but essentially ignore
negative signals altogether.
Before receiving any feedback, the treatment group is just as overconfident as the control group.
However, they then update their beliefs less optimistically when given feedback, leading to 8 percent-
age points lower overconfidence by the end of the experiment compared to the control group (s.e.=3
percentagepoints).6 Thepointestimatesfortheseeffectsarestrikinglysimilaracrossthetwotrials,de-
spiteonlyonetrialshowingreductionsindepression. Thissuggeststhatpsychotherapy—independently
from its effects on depression—helps people have more accurate views of themselves.
We next provide evidence that psychotherapy increases people’s self-assessments of their levels of
patience(0.24SD,p<0.01)andaltruism(0.19SD,p<0.05)—measuredusingvalidatedsurveyquestions
from Falk et al. (2018)—while not changing self-assessed risk tolerance. In contrast, we detect no
significant effects on incentivized measures of altruism, patience, and risk tolerance: a dictator game,
a savings task, and choices between lotteries.7 Combining the different types of measures, we find
significant increases in overall indices of patience (0.18 SD, p=0.03) and altruism (0.21 SD, p=0.01)
but no effect on risk tolerance. One interpretation of these results is that therapy affects how people
6Studying responses to positive and negative feedback separately, we find that this effect is driven by the treatment
group being significantly less responsive to positive feedback (p=0.03), with no effect on responsiveness to negative
feedback(p=0.51). Combined,thisimplieslessasymmetryinresponsetopositiveandnegativefeedback(p=0.08). This
could be be interpreted as an increase in ‘rationality’ as a Bayesian should respond equally to positive and negative
signals, but is also in some sense further from the Bayesian benchmark, since the treatment group becomes even more
conservative in their response to positive signals.
7The point estimate on dictator-game giving is positive (0.1 SD) but not significant.
3

interpreted their own behaviors, causing them to have less negative beliefs about themselves.8
Finally, we report impacts on poverty-related outcomes. We find no evidence of significant impacts
on consumption or on self-reported employment, labor supply, or earnings, nor on revealed-preference
measures of people’s willingness to work and on their productivity in the bracelet-making task. In the
case of the labor-market outcomes such as employment, reservation wages and real-stakes willingness
to accept a job offer, these null effects are fairly precise. For example, we can rule out increases in
employment of 5 percentage points compared to a control-group mean of 25 percent. The absence of
long-run impacts on labor-market outcomes and consumption may be explained by the fact that the
sample is predominantly female, and women face numerous barriers to working outside the household
in this context (Fletcher, Pande and Moore, 2017).9
This paper contributes to several literatures. First, it expands the fledgling literature on the
long-run impacts of psychotherapy on depression. Numerous studies have demonstrated the short-run
efficacy of inexpensive psychological interventions in improving mental health in the developing world
(Singlaetal.,2017). However,withtheexceptionofBaranovetal.(2020),littleworkexistsonthelong-
run impacts of such interventions or indeed of other psychotherapy interventions to treat depression
in rich countries (Steinert et al., 2014). We find substantial long-run effects of therapy on depression,
exceeding the quantitative predictions of experts who had been presented with the short-run effects.
This suggests that the findings of Baranov et al. (2020) generalize beyond their specific context and
population of pregnant women and extend to a simpler form of therapy delivered by counselors outside
of the overburdened public health system. The intervention was remarkably cost-effective: about $7
per month of depression averted.
Second,ourpapertakesasteptowardsprovidingabehavioral-scienceviewofpsychotherapy,build-
ingonworkbyBlattman,JamisonandSheridan(2017)andHelleretal.(2017).10 Ourkeycontribution
relativetothesepapersistheuseoflab-experimentalmethodstostudyeffectsofpsychotherapyonbe-
liefs, a central aspect of depression and therapy. We find that therapy durably reduced highly negative
beliefs about oneself: treated participants were substantially less likely to report feeling like a failure
or feeling bad about themselves or about letting others down. They also had higher self-perceptions
of their own patience and altruism. Yet therapy did not simply make their beliefs about themselves
uniformly more positive. They also developed more accurate—less overconfident—beliefs about them-
selves in a novel work domain. This pattern of findings is broadly consistent with the theory of CBT
(Beck, 2020)—of which behavioral activation is a key element—and arguably contrary to the theory
of depression realism, for which we find little support.
Third, we contribute to the literature on the causal effects of therapy on economic outcomes more
broadly (Ridley et al., 2020). Lund et al. (2021) review RCTs of psychotherapy for depression in the
8Alternatively, self-assessments may reflect a broader set of real-world behaviors than those captured by the experi-
mental measures.
9We do detect significant improvements in self-reported sleep quality and duration, but no impacts on measures of
female empowerment, experienced intimate partner violence, loneliness, or locus of control.
10Blattman, Jamison and Sheridan (2017) show that cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) targeted at increasing self-
controlandreducingimpulsivebehaviorsuccessfullyincreasespatienceandreducesviolentbehavior. Helleretal.(2017)
showthataninterventionwithmanyelementsofCBTreducescrimeanddropoutamongdisadvantagedyouthinChicago,
partly by causing recipients to act less on automatic thoughts.
4

developing world and identify short-term reductions in self-reported days missed at work. Also in the
short-run,Barkeretal.(2021)findthataCBTinterventionimprovesmentalhealth,cognition,andself-
perceivedeconomicstatusamongpoor(notnecessarilydepressed)individualsinGhana. Inthelonger-
run, Baranov et al. (2020) show effects of therapy on female empowerment and investments in children
in a sample of depressed pregnant women in Pakistan. More broadly, Bossuroy et al. (2022) show that
adding psychosocial support—life-skills training and community sensitization around aspirations and
social norms—to a multi-faceted intervention including cash transfers, coaching and entrepreneurship
training further improves economic and psychological outcomes among extremely poor households in
Niger. Wedetectnolong-runimpactsofpsychotherapyfordepressiononconsumptionandwork-related
outcomes, suggestingthatimprovingmentalhealthisnotenoughtogeneratesustainedeconomicgains
in this population. It is possible that therapy would generate greater economic benefits as part of a
multi-faceted intervention, as in Bossuroy et al. (2022).11
Finally, we provide novel evidence of people’s perceptions of the efficacy of psychotherapy. When
asked about reasons for not seeking mental healthcare, respondents in ten countries commonly cited
lack of confidence in treatment as a reason (Sapiens Lab, 2021). Our incentivized belief measures
indeed show that HAP trial control-group participants underestimate the efficacy of the treatment,
whichpointstopossibledemand-sidebarrierstotheadoptionofeffectivetreatments. Wealsoshowthat
experiencing therapy durably increases beliefs about its efficacy, indicating that demand for therapy
might increase in a society as the population comes to have more experience with it.
2 Background and Study Design
2.1 Study background
Depression, one of the most common mental disorders, has a life-time prevalence of about 20
percent (Kessler and Wang, 2009). Estimates for India show that about 3.3 percent of the population
suffers from depression at a given point in time (Sagar et al., 2020). More recent evidence suggests
stark increases in mental disorders since the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic in India and globally
(Verma and Mishra, 2020; Santomauro et al., 2021). While depression affects all segments of society,
it is particularly pronounced among the poor in any given setting (Ridley et al., 2020). Depression is
also about 70% more prevalent among women than men (Albert, 2015).
Despite the high prevalence of depression and the effectiveness of therapy shown in numerous trials
(e.g. Cuijpers et al., 2010, 2015), professional treatment for common mental disorders in the form
of medication or psychotherapy is not available in many parts of the world. A key reason for such
treatment gaps is the low supply of trained psychiatrists. A promising solution is the development of
inexpensive treatments to be delivered by non-specialist counsellors (Patel et al., 2009, 2011). Such
interventions have been found to be effective in a range of low-resource settings worldwide (Singla
et al., 2017), including India (Patel et al., 2010).
11Haushofer, Mudida and Shapiro (2020) find no effects on either mental health or economic well-being of a therapy
intervention one year after treatment. However, that study did not establish short-term effects on mental health.
5

2.2 Description of trials
Located in Goa, a state on the west coast of India, the non-profit research organization Sangath
seeks to make effective mental-health services more widely accessible by developing and testing non-
specialistmentalhealthcareinterventions.12 WefollowupontwoRCTsofpsychotherapyfordepression
implemented by Sangath in partnership with academic researchers between 2013 and 2016.
Healthy Activity Programme (HAP). The first trial was designed to estimate the effects of
the ‘Healthy Activity Program’ (HAP) psychotherapy intervention on depression 3 and 12 months
post enrollment (Patel et al., 2017; Weobong et al., 2017). The sample of 495 participants aged 18 to
65 was recruited between October 2013 and July 2015 at ten primary health centers (PHCs) in Goa.
Potential participants were screened for depression using the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9),
a nine-item depression screening tool.
Adults visiting the health centers who screened positive for at least moderately-severe depression—
as measured by a PHQ-9 score of at least 15—were offered participation in the trial. About 2 percent
ofthosescreenedwerefoundtobeeligibleforthetrial.13 Theseparticipantsweregenerallynotseeking
treatment for depression and were instead visiting the PHC for other medical conditions. Those who
agreed to participate in the trial—about two-thirds of those eligible—were then randomized to one of
two conditions:
• Control group: EUC. The control group received ‘enhanced usual care’ (EUC), which entailed
informing both the participant and the physician at the PHC of the positive depression screening
result. The physician was also provided with adapted treatment guidelines for depression from
the WHO’s Mental Health Gap Action Programme (WHO, 2010). Given the scarcity of trained
psychiatristsandtheworkloadofphysiciansinthePHCs, thisconditioninpracticeentailedlittle
active treatment of depression.
• Treatment group: EUC+HAP. The treatment group received EUC plus HAP, a psychological
treatment based on behavioral activation. The HAP intervention consisted of 6 to 8 weekly ses-
sions of 30 to 40 minutes each, delivered individually at participants’ homes or at the local PHC.
Counselors were members of the local community, recruited through newspaper advertisements
and word of mouth, screened through an interview procedure, and trained by Sangath. The cen-
tral aspect of the treatment was to encourage participants to schedule and engage in pleasurable
activities of their choice. Depression often involves withdrawing from such activities, which in
turn can feed back into low mood. Behavioral activation is theorized to operate by breaking
these negative cycles of inactivity and depression. Counselors also educated participants about
mental health, taught strategies to avoid rumination, and encouraged them to take steps to solve
the problems they faced in their lives.14
About 70 percent of HAP participants completed the full course of therapy by attending all the
assignedsessions. Intent-to-treatanalysesrevealedthattheHAPinterventionincreasedremissionfrom
12Sangath was co-founded by coauthor Vikram Patel.
138 percent of those screened had at least moderate depression (a PHQ-9 score of at least 10).
14In case of specific needs, counselors also taught strategies to improve interpersonal communication skills, improve
sleep and train relaxation.
6

depression(havingaPHQ-9scorebelow10)by25percentagepointsafter3months(Pateletal.,2017)
and by 16 percentage points after 12 months (Weobong et al., 2017). These findings were published
before data collection for our follow up began.
Thinking Healthy Programme Peer-Delivered (THPP). The second RCT was designed to
measure the impacts of the Thinking Healthy Program Peer-delivered (THPP) on depression among
pregnant women (Fuhr et al., 2019). THPP is a simplified version of a psychological intervention
(THP) for treating perinatal depression that has been found to be effective in similar settings and is
recommended by the WHO (Rahman et al., 2008, 2013; WHO, 2015; Baranov et al., 2020). While the
original THP trials employed a full-fledged cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) intervention, THPP
was a simpler intervention focused on behavioral activation, as in the HAP trial described above.
THPP was designed to be delivered by peer counselors, instead of community health workers as in
previous trials.
The trial recruited 280 women with perinatal depression between October 2014 and June 2016.
Study participants were recruited from two antenatal clinics and two primary health centers in the
north district of Goa. Adult women were eligible if they were in their second or third trimester of
pregnancy and screened for depression based on a PHQ-9 score of at least 10. Five percent of pregnant
women exceeded this screening threshold and were thus eligible to participate in the study. Given
the lower screening threshold compared to the HAP trial (10 vs. 15), THPP participants exhibited on
average lower depression severity than HAP participants.
• ControlGroup: EUC.Thecontrolgroupagainreceivedenhancedusualcare(EUC).Thisincluded
standard care from the gynaecologist as well as information to both patients and gynaecologists
thattheparticipanthadscreenedpositivefordepression. Gynaecologistswerealsoprovidedwith
adapted treatment guidelines for perinatal depression (WHO, 2010).
• Treatment Group: EUC+THPP. In addition to EUC, participants in the treatment group re-
ceived the Thinking Healthy Programme (Peer-delivered). The counsellors were middle-aged
women with children, who had shown an interest in supporting other women in the community,
selectedfortheirgoodcommunicationskills. Theinterventionentailed6to14individualsessions
over 7 to 12 months for about 30 to 45 minutes each. The sessions were divided into four phases,
beginning in the second or third trimester of pregnancy and ending six months after childbirth.
As with the HAP intervention, the THPP intervention focused on behavioral activation.
Seventy-two percent of THPP participants completed the course of therapy. Fuhr et al. (2019)
reportthattheinterventionledtomoderateimprovementinmentalhealthsixmonthsafterchildbirth.
Remission from depression—defined in Fuhr et al. (2019) as a PHQ-9 score below 5—was increased
significantly by 11 percentage points 6 months after childbirth, although average PHQ-9 scores were
not significantly different between treatment and control groups. These results were not yet unblinded
when we began our data collection for this study.
Training of counsellors and cost of treatment. In both trials, counsellors received classroom-
based training that focused on intervention content and relationship-building skills, followed by a an
7

internship involving additional training and group supervision (Singla et al., 2014; Sikander et al.,
2015). Given their brief nature and mode of delivery, the interventions were inexpensive, with an
estimated costs (relative to EUC) of $66 per person for HAP (Patel et al., 2016) and $72 for THPP
(Fuhr et al., 2019).
2.3 Recruitment, balance, and incentives
This paper reports data based on follow-up visits conducted on average 5 years after enrollment in
the HAP trial and 4 years after enrollment in the THPP trial. Figures A.1 and A.2 report CONSORT
diagramsforthetwotrials. Sincethetrialshadnotbeendesignedforlong-runfollow-ups, thisentailed
significant difficulty in locating study participants. We attempted to contact all participants through
multiple phone calls or home visits using contact information from the original trials. We asked all
original study participants whom we were able to locate whether they were interested in completing a
follow-up study. All interested participants were offered the choice of completing the follow-up study
activities at at a local study office or in their homes (or nearby location, such as a local temple).
Activities took place over two sessions, approximately one week apart. Appendix B details the division
of activities across sessions.
Data collection started in December 2018 and ended in March 2020 due to Covid-19 restrictions in
India. Until then, we were able to follow up with 589 out of 773 participants (76.2%) across the two
trials (Table 1). This follow-up rate is somewhat higher than in Baranov et al. (2020), which might
be due the fact that their follow-up study in Pakistan was about seven years after the treatment was
delivered. Participation in the control group were slightly higher (78%) compared to the treatment
group, though this difference is not statistically significant. Table A.1 shows that follow-up rates were
higher for the HAP trial (79%) than for the THPP trial (69%).
Table 1 shows demographics and baseline mental health across treatment and control groups for
the pooled study sample. The vast majority of study participants were female (88 percent) and
married (81 percent), with an average of just over six years of education. About a third of the sample
was employed at enrollment. Both at baseline and in our follow-up sample, we find no statistically
significant differences across treatment and control groups in their baseline characteristics. An F-test
for balance in baseline characteristics cannot be rejected either at enrollment (p=0.91) or in the follow-
up sample (p=0.73). This implies that the initial randomization was successful and that attrition from
baseline to our follow-up was not differential across groups.
Appendix Table A.1 shows the same analysis separately by trial. As expected given the differ-
ent screening criteria, PHQ-9 scores at the time of enrollment are higher in the HAP sample (17.8)
than in the THPP trial (12.8). For each trial, we again find no evidence of imbalances in baseline
characteristics—including baseline PHQ-9 scores—either at baseline or at follow-up.
Our data collection involved a number of experimental tasks to measure beliefs about treatment
effects, belief-updating behavior, economic preferences, and labor supply. Apart from a few hypothet-
ical measures, these tasks were financially incentivized: within each task, one choice was randomly
selected for payment and the rewards incorporated into the participant’s earnings for that session.15
15EarningswereroundeduptoRs.400iflessthanthatamount,andparticipantsalsoreceivedreimbursementoftheir
8

3 Empirical Framework
3.1 Description of empirical framework
Most of our empirical analyses estimate treatment effects on outcomes measured at the participant
level using variants of a standard OLS regression framework:
y = βT +g(X )+ε , (1)
i i i i
where y is the relevant outcome for participant i. T is an indicator variable capturing the treatment
i i
that participant i was assigned to, and g(X ) is a function of a vector of control variables selected
i
by a double machine learning (DML) procedure, described below. β is the key coefficient of interest,
capturing the impact of each treatment on the outcome of interest. For all outcomes, we show results
for pooling the two trials (our main specification) as well as results for each of the two trials separately.
Following our pre-registration, we report both estimates without controls and using the “double
machinelearning” (DML)approachfromChernozhukovetal.(2016).16 Weincludeaspotentialcontrols
all baseline variables that were collected, a subset of which are shown in Table 1 (categorical variables
converted to dummies), plus surveyor fixed effects. In the pooled specification, for variables that were
not measured in both trials, we impute the mean value of this variable for participants for whom it
is missing, and additionally include a trial fixed effect. Both specifications give very similar point
estimates and precision, consistent with the absence of any meaningful imbalances as demonstrated in
Section 2.3.
When reporting results for categories of outcomes for which we have multiple measures (e.g. the
preference outcomes in Table 5), we also report treatment effects on an index across the measures,
following the inverse covariance weighted approach to index construction recommended by Anderson
(2008). If a participant is missing one or more index components, we adjust the weights proportionally
on the non-missing components, so that the sum of weights is the same for all participants. After
constructing the index measure, we normalize it to mean zero, standard deviation one, in the control
group of the particular regression of interest.
3.2 Pre-analysis plan and multiple hypothesis testing
Our empirical analysis closely follows our pre-analysis plan.17 We deviate from this plan in three
ways. First, we specified that we would stratify the sample-splitting procedure in the DML estimation
by trial. This turned out to be impractical to implement. Since our estimation uses many sample
splits, we believe this is very unlikely to make a material difference. Second, we pre-specified that
our primary measure of overconfidence would be initial overconfidence before the belief-updating task;
later we realized that overconfidence after the task (i.e. after receiving structured feedback) is at least
transportation costs, plus a final bonus of Rs. 200, 2 packets of oil, or an umbrella, for those that completed the whole
study.
16WeusealgorithmDML1. WeusetheRandomForestalgorithmtopredictoutcomeandtreatmentbasedoncontrols
with a 2-folds sample splitting procedure with 100 splits and 1000 trees.
17We posted the pre-analysis plan to the AEA trial registry shortly after the start of our data collection activities:
https://doi.org/10.1257/rct.3823-1.0
9

as interesting, so we report both effects and adjust for multiple comparisons. Third, the elicitation of
beliefs about treatment effects was designed later, and does not appear in the pre-analysis plan.18
We pre-specified five families of primary outcomes (depression measured by PHQ-9, overconfi-
dence, belief updating, hiring scheme decisions, and preferences). We adjust for multiple comparisons
within each family when relevant, and report false discovery rate (FDR) q-values in the regression
tables.19 Secondary outcomes such as employment, consumption, female empowerment, intimate part-
ner violence, and sleep are not corrected for multiple-hypotheses testing and their analysis should be
interpreted as exploratory.
3.3 Expert predictions
To quantify how our results compare with current scientific understanding, we conducted surveys
of experts in economics and mental health to elicit their forecasts about the treatment effects of psy-
chotherapy on the main outcomes we study (DellaVigna, Pope and Vivalt, 2019). The survey was
posted on the Social Science Prediction Platform, which maintains a mailing list of experts (primarily
faculty and graduate students in economics and behavioral science). In addition, we solicited partici-
pation via emails to experts in psychology and psychiatry. Altogether, 234 experts made forecasts, of
which 145 were economists and 41 were experts in mental health (usually psychiatry or psychology).
Others were in fields such as public policy, biostatistics, and political science.
For simplicity and to reduce the burden on forecasters, we elicited predictions only for the HAP
trial. We chose HAP since this was the larger of our two trials and had a significant short-term impact
on depression, making forecasts of long-run effects more meaningful. Forecasters were informed about
the design of the study, the baseline levels of depression, and impacts on PHQ-9 scores three and
twelve months after enrollment. They were then asked to predict the effects found during our five-year
follow-upon(i)PHQ-9scores, (ii)initialoverconfidenceandasymmetryinbelief-updating, (iii)indices
of time, risk and social preferences, and (iv) consumption and employment. The expert predictions
are shown in Figure 8 and in Appendix Table A.15, and discussed when presenting results.
4 Impacts on Depression
4.1 Treatment effects on depression
Our main measure of depression is the participant’s score on the Patient Health Questionnaire-9
(PHQ-9), a screening tool which asks patients about the frequency of experiencing nine symptoms of
depressionoverthepasttwoweeks(Kroenke,SpitzerandWilliams,2002). Thismeasureiswidelyused
inclinicalresearch,validatedinIndia,anddesignedtobeadministeredbylaypeople(Pateletal.,2008;
18There are two other minor points of note. First, we specified that our primary analysis would follow an intent-to-
treat approach, but that we would report instrumental variables estimates if the “first stage” was sufficiently strong.
Our estimates are statistically significant but the F-statistic is below conventional thresholds, so we do not report IV
estimates. Second,wepre-specifiedthatwewoulddropbinaryoutcomesiftherewassignificantbunching(90%ormore
with the same outcome). This applies to one of our outcomes, which sought to measure default effects.
19While results regarding multiple families of outcomes (e.g. overconfidence and belief updating) are presented in the
same table for ease of exposition, FDR corrections are done within family as described here.
10

Manea, Gilbody and McMillan, 2012; Indu et al., 2018). It has also been shown to adequately capture
improvements in depression due to clinical interventions, thus mitigating concerns about experimenter
demand effects (Löwe et al., 2006; McMillan, Gilbody and Richards, 2010). We use average PHQ-9
scores as a measure of severity of depression and standard thresholds of PHQ-9 scores below 10 and
5 to categorize moderate and mild depression, respectively, following earlier phases of the two trials
(Patel et al., 2017; Weobong et al., 2017; Fuhr et al., 2019).20
Pooling the two trials, we find evidence of long-run reductions in depression in the treatment group
(Table 2, col 2). Specifically, the treatment reduced participants’ average PHQ-9 score by 0.85 points
on a base of just below 8 (p=0.08), a 0.15 SD improvement. Treatment increases remission from de-
pression by 8 and 11 percentage points, for the the mild and moderate depression screening thresholds,
respectively (p=0.03 and p=0.01). Considering each sub-component of the PHQ-9 index, treatment
significantly reduces the frequency with which participants report feeling bad about themselves—like
a failure, letting down themselves or their families—and of experiencing poor appetite or overeating
(Table A.2). Point estimates also suggest reductions in feeling down or hopeless, having poor sleep,
and feeling tired and low energy. Consistent with the effects on depression, we find a 0.39 point (or
0.17 SD) increase in a mood score—average self-reported happiness over three days—across the two
trials (p=0.04).
The treatment effect on depression is entirely driven by the HAP intervention (Table 2, col 4).
HAPreducedPHQ-9scoresfiveyearslaterby1.37points, a0.23SDreduction(p=0.02), andincreased
remissionfrombothmildandmoderatedepressionby13percentagepoints(p<0.01). Thesetreatment
effects are concentrated among participants who—five years after enrollment—would have had mild
or moderate depression in the absence of treatment. Figure 2 Panel A shows a clear difference in
the distributions of HAP treatment and control groups for endline PHQ-9 scores of 12 and below,
while the two distributions are nearly indistinguishable for higher PHQ-9 scores. In contrast, we find
no significant effect of the THPP treatment on depression (Table 2, col 6), and the distributions of
PHQ-9 scores appear identical across the THPP treatment and control groups (Figure 2 Panel B).21
We also find no systematic evidence of treatment effects varying by baseline characteristics.22
Figure 3 Panel B shows the full trajectory of depression over the course of the study, including the
previous waves of these trials. As documented in previous work (Patel et al., 2017; Weobong et al.,
2017), HAP reduced depression three months and one year after the intervention. Remarkably, the
treatment effects one year after the treatment (17 percentage point prevalence reduction) were largely
maintained in our follow-up study another four years later. The trajectory of depression resembles the
20We report estimates both without controls and from the DML specification. Both specifications give very similar
conclusions, we report the slightly more conservative DML estimates in the text.
21Due to limited power when comparing across trials, we cannot reject that the THPP and HAP trials had equal
treatment effects except for one marginally significant estimate (Table 2, column 7).
22We explore heterogeneous treatment effects in two ways. First, as pre-registered, we implement the Chernozhukov
et al. (2018) machine learning approach, which searches for combinations of variables that jointly predict heterogeneity
intreatmenteffects. FigureA.4presentsSortedGroupAverageTreatmentEffects(GATES)forquartilesoftheMachine
Learning-based proxy predictors. While there appears to be some heterogeneity—the difference between the largest
and smallest estimate is quantitatively large—it is noisy and unpredictable. Second, we run regressions interacting the
treatment indicators with key baseline variables, and find that only participant’s age at baseline predicts treatment
effects on depression (Table A.3).
11

one found in Baranov et al. (2020), though remission rates for the control group in the HAP trial are
lower, likely due to their higher severity of depression at enrollment.
The relatively small effects of THPP we report are consistent with the short-run effects reported
after our data collection began: Fuhr et al. (2019) find a marginally significant reduction of 1.5 PHQ-9
points three months after the intervention, but the treatment effect is less pronounced and no longer
statistically significant six months after the intervention. The control group showed high remission
rates, which might explain why THPP did not cause large treatment effects. For instance, 3 months
after recruitment, 51 percent of untreated participants have a PHQ-9 score below 5 (the threshold for
mild depression) and 77 percent a PHQ-9 score below 10 (the threshold for moderate depression). The
muted treatment effects and high remission rates in the control group mirror the findings by Maselko
et al. (2020) in a similar study of a THPP intervention in Pakistan.
4.2 Discussion
Arguably the most policy-relevant result in this study is the sustained reduction in depression due
to the HAP intervention. This enhances the already favorable cost-effectiveness estimate for HAP, as
illustrated in Figure A.7 Panel A. Based on the short-run estimates, the HAP intervention averted 0.4
depressionmonths—i.e.aparticipantwithaPHQ-9scoreabove10inagivenmonth—at3monthsand
1.9 depression months at 1 year.23 The long-run effects increase this estimate to 9 depression months
averted at 5 years, more than quadrupling the overall reduction of months of depression experienced
compared to the short-run estimates alone. Given the costs of the treatment of $66 per participant,
this implies a cost of at most $7.33 per depression month saved, conservatively assuming no further
effectsbeyondfiveyearsandnotincludingtheshort-runearningsgainsandavertedhealthexpenditures
documented in Patel et al. (2017) and Weobong et al. (2017).
These long-run effects of HAP significantly exceeded expert forecasts. Experts were informed
about the short-run effects of HAP on PHQ-9 scores, and asked to predict the effects five years after
enrollment, as reported in Figure 8 and Table A.15. The median expert predicted a reduction in
PHQ-9 scores of 0.08 SD, with over 90% of experts underestimating the actual estimated effect of 0.23
SD. The median prediction among economists (−0.07 SD) was similar to that of mental health experts
(−0.1 SD).Our findings implythatpsychotherapy fordepressionmay beevenmoreeffective—through
having more persistent effects—than experts believe.
The under-estimation of the long-run effects of therapy in our context might be explained by the
paucity of similar long-run studies. Figure 1 plots our estimates compared to those from the literature,
focusing on non-specialist psychotherapy trials in low- and middle-income countries. A vast majority
of studies measure impacts at 12 months or less after enrollment, showing sizable short-run effects
on average, with substantial variation across trials. Only Baranov et al. (2020) measures effects at a
longer time-horizon than this study (seven years). Like our HAP study, they find significantly lower
depression prevalence and severity in the treatment group, with comparable effect sizes (0.18 to 0.22
SD). Our findings complement theirs by studying a general population of adults as opposed to their
23These calculations involve linear interpolation of effects between the 3 and 12 month effects, and similarly between
the 12 and 60 month effects.
12

sample of pregnant women. Our findings from the THPP trial instead differ from theirs and resemble
another THPP evaluation in Pakistan (Maselko et al., 2020). The difference may be explained by
THPP employing a much simpler intervention, delivered by peers.
Why do the HAP and THPP trials have different long-run (and short-run) effects? A striking
difference between the two samples is the much higher rate of spontaneous remission from depression
in the THPP trial. One reason could be that the HAP trial recruited a sample with higher baseline
severity of depression, which tends to involve less spontaneous remission without treatment. HAP
trial participants also reported having been depressed for much longer at enrollment than THPP trial
participants (43 weeks versus 11 weeks, Appendix Table A.1).24 Another possibility is that depression
in the sample of pregnant women in the THPP trial has a more circumscribed environmental trigger
(pregnancyandchildbirth), explainingthehighratesofremission. Ineithercase, wenotethatthelack
of effects in the THPP trial arguably reduces any concerns that treated participants feel differential
social pressure to report improvements in symptoms of depression.25
Finally,itisworthdiscussingwhy therapyhadsuchpersistenteffectsintheHAPtrial. Asdescribed
below, we do not find evidence of improvements in economic well-being, and thus improved material
circumstances cannot explain the persistent psychological benefits. Instead, a likely explanation is
thatparticipants learnedthe principles ortoolsof behavioralactivationand employed themto manage
future challenges to their mental health. Figure A.6 reports the results of a mediation analysis, which
finds that the strongest mediator of the long-run effect on depression is—not surprisingly—the short-
runeffectondepression. Thenextstrongestmediatorisameasureofbehavioralactivation—theextent
towhichparticipantswereactiveandengagedinenjoyableactivities. Thesearepreciselytheprinciples
and tools taught to participants during the course of the therapy intervention.
5 Perceived Treatment Efficacy
Manypeoplewhomightbenefitfromtherapydonotseekitout(Cronin,ForsstromandPapageorge,
2020). A lack of familiarity with therapy and skepticism about its efficacy are commonly stated in
surveys(SapiensLab,2021). EspeciallyinsettingssuchasIndia, wherepsychotherapywasunavailable
until recently, learning by experience (and subsequent diffusion through social networks) may foster
demand for therapy.
To test this idea, we elicited study participants’ beliefs about the short- and long-run effects of
therapy on depression. During our long-run follow-up surveys, each participant was asked about the
treatment effects in their own trial for three time horizons: at three or six months, at one year, and
at four to five years after the completion of the treatment. We elicited participants’ beliefs about
the probability of remission from depression—as measured by having a PHQ-9 score below 10—for
24However, Figure A.5 shows no evidence of a treatment effect even among those THPP participants with PHQ-9 >
15,asintheHAPtrial. Evenforthissub-sample,spontaneousremissioninthecontrolgroupremainsmorecommonin
the THPP trial than in HAP.
25Moregenerally,PHQ-9iswidelyusedasanoutcomemeasureinclinicalresearch,whereithasbeenvalidatedagainst
morein-depthstructureddiagnosticinterviewsandhasbeenfoundtoadequatelycaptureimprovementsinmentalhealth
(Löwe et al., 2006; McMillan, Gilbody and Richards, 2010; Beard et al., 2016).
13

both the treatment and control groups, with the difference being the perceived treatment effect.26 We
incentivized the belief measures for accuracy by comparing their answers to our causal estimates.27
Figure 4 and Table 3 show the resulting estimates.
Our first result is that control-group participants tend to under-estimate the treatment effects of
the highly-effective HAP intervention while over-estimating the effects of the largely ineffective THPP
intervention. The HAP control group underestimates the HAP treatment effects at all time horizons,
bybetween5and15percentagepoints, astatisticallysignificantdifferenceforthetwoshorter-runtime
horizons (Figure 4 Panel A). In contrast, the THPP control group overestimates the THPP treatment
effects at all time horizons (Figure 4 Panel B). Thus, we cannot expect inexperienced patients—as
in the control group—to identify effective treatments without additional guidance. Consistent with
this, Table A.3 shows that ex-ante expectations of the efficacy of treatment—measured in the baseline
survey using an unincentivized Likert-scale question—do not predict individual treatment effects.
Second, experiencingthetreatmentincreasesperceivedeffectivenessoftherapyinthelong-run. For
both trials, the treatment group’s beliefs (dark blue) about the medium and long-run treatment effects
are significantly more positive (by 7 to 11 percentage points) than the control group’s beliefs (light
blue). We find no differences in beliefs about the short-run impacts of therapy, which may reflect
difficulty recalling how quickly treatment led to improvements. This latter finding also arguably
provides evidence against differential social pressure to state positive beliefs among the treatment
group, since we might expect such demand effects to upward-bias responses for all time horizons.
What are the takeaways from these results? First, a common result in both trials is that experi-
encing psychotherapy makes people more optimistic about its effectiveness. If such changes in beliefs
spreadinsocialnetworks, theymightincreasedemandfortreatment. Second, wecannotexpectpeople
to identify the most effective treatments by themselves. Indeed, even experience with therapy may
not solve this problem, as it causes participants to become more optimistic even about a relatively
ineffective treatment. Participants appear to find it difficult to disentangle true treatment effects from
the improvements in their mental health that would occur even in the absence of any treatment. This
is a challenge patients face in judging healthcare efficacy in many contexts, and suggests a potential
roleforinformationprovisionandregulationofmentalhealthtreatmentstobeexploredinfuturework.
6 Self-confidence and Belief Updating
In the previous section, we provided evidence that therapy durably improves mental health. This
included notable changes in patients’ self-perceptions: treated participants were significantly less likely
to perceive themselves as a failure or to feel they had let themselves or their families down. This
26Specifically, we described the program to them, detailing the intervention received by the treatment group and the
controlgroup(forHAPparticipantswedescribedtheHAPintervention,forTHPPparticipantswedescribedtheTHPP
intervention). Wethenasked,foreachhorizonandforthetreatmentandcontrolgroupseparately,whattheparticipant
believed would be the remission rate in that group. Specifically, we asked, out of 10 randomly selected members of the
group,howmanywouldhavehadtheirdepression“reducedtohealthylevels.” Wethencomputetheparticipant’sbelief
aboutthetreatmenteffectasthedifferencebetweenthesetworemissionrates. Incentivesusedaquadraticscoringrule.
If selected for payment, the question paid Rs. 75 minus 0.75 times their squared error.
27We added the beliefs about treatment effects module a short while after the surveys were launched, so we do not
have this measure for all participants. For the same reason, these beliefs are not part of our pre-registration.
14

kind of self-perception is inherently subjective and broad, and the findings imply that therapy results
in a more robust self-image. In this section, we turn to rigorously measuring self-perceptions in an
economic domain with an objective measure of truth. In particular, we study self-confidence: people’s
beliefs about how well they perform at a novel work task relative to others. We find that therapy
causes such beliefs about oneself to become more accurate by affecting how people’s beliefs change in
response to informative feedback.
6.1 Measuring confidence and belief updating
Wemeasureself-confidenceandbeliefupdatingusinganexperimentalparadigmextensivelyapplied
inpreviousworkwithWestern,Educated,Industrialized,Rich,andDemocratic(WEIRD)samples(e.g.
EilandRao,2011;Ertac,2011;Buser,GerhardsandVanDerWeele,2018;Coutts,2019;Zimmermann,
2020; Mobius et al., 2021). We closely follow the design of Mobius et al. (2021), adapting it for low-
numeracy participants by developing detailed instructions augmented with examples and employing
a novel belief elicitation method using physical aids in the spirit of Delavande, Giné and McKenzie
(2011).
Participants complete an incentivized work task before reporting their beliefs about whether they
scored in the top half of a group of participants. They then update these beliefs following noisy but
informative feedback. We use this paradigm to study whether the treatments affected participants’
confidence in their own performance, and the nature of their belief updating. Of particular interest is
whether treatment participants put disproportionate weight on positive compared to negative signals,
and thus become more overconfidence over time. Such belief-updating patterns have been interpreted
as evidence of ‘optimism bias’ in an attempt to protect one’s ego (Mobius et al., 2021).
Work task. Participants are asked to create bracelets using string and beads. During a practice
phase, participants learned the quality criteria: a precise number of beads, a knot, and the extra string
being cut off. After this practice phase, participants make bracelets for ten minutes and are paid
Rs. 5 for each completed bracelet, subject to quality standards. This task was chosen as it requires
dexterity, skill, and concentration, and is thus potentially seen as ego-relevant. It is also relevant to
their real economic lives, as creating beaded bracelets for sale is similar to the types of jobs that many
of them could pursue in their everyday lives. To further enhance this effect, we told participants in
advancethat, dependingontheirperformance, theymaybeofferedarealbracelet-makingjobafterthe
experiment(seebelow). AswedescribeininSection8, wefindnoevidenceofdifferencesinobjectively
measured performance across the two treatment groups.
Eliciting beliefs. Upon completing the task, participants are asked to assess their performance
relative to nine randomly selected previous study participants.28 Specifically, we elicited their belief
about the probability of being in the top half of a group of 10 participants (including themselves).
Participants express their beliefs by allocating water between two containers, represent the two states
of the world (top half/bottom half). Thus we use visual aids representing probabilities—as recom-
28For the first few participants we sampled from pilot participants, who were not part of the THPP and HAP trials.
Once we had sufficiently many comparators, we switched to sampling from the actual trial population. We sampled
comparators of the same gender as the participant, to avoid imbalances due to gender differences in performance.
15

mended by, e.g., Delavande, Giné and McKenzie (2011)—while allowing for continuous subjective
beliefs. Beliefs are incentivized using a truncated log scoring rule. Participants could directly see how
an allocation of water translated into monetary payoffs in each state of the world, via a labeled scale
on the containers.29
Noisy signals. After reporting their priors, participants receive five rounds of noisy but informa-
tivesignals, andcanupdatetheirreportedbeliefaftereachsignal. Signalsareindependentlygenerated
messages indicating whether the participant scored in the top half of the group (“high” signal, H) or
not (“low” signal, L). The message is accurate with probability 2 and inaccurate otherwise.30 After
3
the bracelet-making task was finished, we explained the belief elicitation, and elicited priors (“Initial”).
Then, we explained how signals would work, and gave the opportunity to adjust the initial response
(“Adjust”). Then, we revealed each signal one by one, and elicited posteriors following each one, giving
us a total of seven elicited beliefs per participant. Participants are incentivized to truthfully report
their beliefs at every round, since one of their (prior or posterior) beliefs is randomly chosen to ‘count’
for the payment of accuracy incentives.
Measuring confidence. Wecreateameasureofconfidencebycomparingparticipants’subjective
beliefs to objective measures of their relative performance. Using the actual distribution of task
performance in our sample, we derive a full-information benchmark for each participant, i.e., their
true probability of being in the upper half of a randomly-sampled group of 10. We define initial
overconfidence as the difference between participants’ subjective vs. true probability of being in the
top half. After each signal, we update the Bayesian benchmark using Bayes rule, and compute the
path of overconfidence as the difference between reported posteriors and the updated benchmark.
Estimating belief updating parameters. Closely following Mobius et al. (2021), we use the
designtostudydeviationsfromBayesianinformationprocessingusingasimplelinearregressionframe-
work. Writing down Bayes rule in logit form yields
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:20) (cid:21)
µ µ Pr(s |i in upper half)
i,t+1 i,t i,t
ln = ln +ln , (2)
1−µ 1−µ Pr(s |i in lower half)
i,t+1 i,t i,t
where µ is the Bayesian posterior for participant i being in the upper half given prior µ and
i,t+1 i,t
signal s . Adding three parametric degrees of freedom leads to a simple structural model:
i,t
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21)
µ µ Pr(H|upper half) Pr(L|upper half)
ln i,t+1 =δln i,t +β ·1(s =H)·ln +β ·1(s =L)·ln ,
1−µ 1−µ H i,t Pr(H|lower half) L i,t Pr(L|lower half)
i,t+1 i,t
where δ captures the weight on the prior, and β and β measure the weight on positive and negative
H L
29We implemented a truncated log scoring rule, i.e. leaving a container empty corresponds to assigning a very small
floor probability (cid:15) to that state of the world. When a participant puts a fraction p of the water in the container
i
corresponding to the true state of the world, incentives are calculated as constant∗(log(p +(cid:15))−log((cid:15))) which can be
i
representedonavisualscalestartingat0oneachcontainer. Aslongassubjectivebeliefsassignaprobabilityofatleast
(cid:15) to each state of the world, this truncated log scoring rule is strictly proper, i.e. it is incentive compatible for a risk-
neutral expected-utility maximizer to report beliefs truthfully (Selten, 1998). While other mechanisms hold additional
desirable properties in theory, they require sophisticated computations that are challenging to explain to low-numeracy
participants, and complicated mechanisms can backfire (Danz, Vesterlund and Wilson, 2020).
30Signals are explained to participants using the image of a die that determines whether the signal is truthful (if the
dierollsa1,2,3,ora4)ornot(ifthedierollsa5ora6). Actualrealizationsweregeneratedusingthesurveysoftware
(SurveyCTO), so the enumerator is blind to the true state of the world.
16

signals, respectively. ThemodelsnestsBayesianupdatingwithδ = β = β = 1andcanbeestimated
H L
using OLS and the specific likelihood ratios in our experiment:
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
µ µ
ln i,t+1 = δln i,t +β ·ln(2)·1(s = H)−β ·ln(2)·1(s = L)+(cid:15) (3)
H i,t L i,t it
1−µ 1−µ
i,t+1 i,t
We focus on the coefficients β (response to good news), β (response to bad news), and their
H L
difference β −β which captures asymmetric belief updating. We also consider “conservatism”: the
H L
value of β obtained by imposing β =β =β¯, i.e., forcing symmetric responses to good and bad news.
H L
Sample restrictions. As pre-registered, our main analysis drops observations with a degenerate
prior or posterior, i.e. µ ,µ ∈ (0,1), since the log likelihood ratios in the regression equation are
i,t i,t+1
not defined for degenerate beliefs. In robustness checks, following Mobius et al. (2021), we sequentially
drop observations who violate basic rules of Bayesian updating: (i) participants who never update
their beliefs in response to feedback; (ii) individual observations without an update; (iii) individual
observationsthatupdateinthewrongdirection(i.e., oppositetothe signal), and(iv) participantsthat
ever update in the wrong direction.31
Job application decision. After participants have completed the beliefs task, they are offered
a job application decision: They can either take an outside option of Rs. 300 for sure (about a day’s
wage), or choose to apply for a job that offers Rs. 3,000 for making 1,000 bracelets over the course
of one month. While the job is lucrative for participants with capacity to take on additional work, it
is only offered to participants whose performance is in the upper half of the sample.32 Anyone who
apply but is in the lower half of their group is not hired and receives Rs. 0. Thus, the more likely a
participant believes that they are in the upper half, the more attractive the opportunity becomes. We
discuss impacts on the application decision alongside other labor market outcomes in Section 8.
6.2 Overconfidence and belief updating in the control group
Before discussing the treatment effect of therapy on confidence and belief updating, we first study
the beliefs of participants who did not receive therapy. This is interesting because, consistent with
the theory of depressive realism, some scholars have argued that depression is related to an absence
of optimistic belief-updating (Korn et al., 2014). However, evidence in this regard is scarce, and more
generallysuchoptimisticbiasesinbelief-updatinghavebeenstudiedexclusivelyinWEIRDpopulations
(Benjamin, 2019).
Prior to receiving any signal, control-group participants exhibit significant overconfidence relative
to the Bayesian benchmark, as illustrated by the light-blue line in Figure 5 Panel A, and the first
row of Table 4. On average, participants’ priors overestimate their true probability of being in the
top half by around 13 percentage points (p<0.001). Initial overconfidence is entirely driven by HAP
31In practice, surveyors would place each beaker on an electronic scale after each round of feedback to capture the
reportedbeliefs. Thisleadstoverysmallvariationsinbeliefsevenwhentheparticipantdidnothing,duetomeasurement
error. Forthepurposeofdefiningnon-updates,weincludeupdatesthatarebelow0.004inmagnitude,whichcorresponds
to 4 milliliters of water, within the measurement error of this weighing procedure.
32The average participant made around 5 bracelets in the allotted 10 minutes. Under the conservative assumption
of no learning by doing, that would imply around 33 hours’ work to make 1,000 bracelets, for which the compensation
approximates 10 days’ wages.
17

trial participants, who overestimate their performance by 22 percentage points (p<0.001). In contrast,
THPP trial participants are closer to the truth and in fact slightly under-confident. Overconfidence in
thecontrolgroupincreasesfurtherafterreceivingnoisybutonaveragetruthfulsignals. Afterreceiving
allfivesignals,controlparticipantsoverestimatedtheirperformanceby16percentagepoints(p<0.001),
a relative increase of 23 percent. This increase in overconfidence is suggestive evidence of optimistic
updating: since signals are informative on average, a Bayesian should trend toward accuracy. The
increase in confidence is larger in THPP, where the average participant has moved from slightly under-
to slightly overconfident by the end of the task.
Estimating the parameters from equation 3, we find clear evidence of optimistic belief updating
in the control group (Table 4 Panel B). The estimate of β = 0.73 for the full sample shows that
H
participants on average update reasonably close to the Bayesian benchmark (β = 1) in response to
H
positive signals (though we can reject β = 1). In contrast, the estimate of β = −0.09 is close to
H L
zero, and we cannot reject that on average the control group does not update at all in response to
negative signals. The stark difference between these estimates implies that belief updating is highly
asymmetric and optimistic (Panel C). We estimate β − β = 0.82, implying a strikingly strong
H L
pattern of optimistic belief updating (p<0.001), much more pronounced than in previous studies with
non-depressed,high-incomesamples(Mobiusetal.,2021;Buser,GerhardsandVanDerWeele,2018).33
6.3 Effects of psychotherapy on belief updating
Priortoreceivinganysignal,wefindnoevidenceofsignificantdifferencesinoverconfidencebetween
treated individuals (dark blue) and control individuals (light blue) (Figure 5 Panel A). The treatment
group is slightly less overconfident initially than the control group, though this difference in confidence
is not statistically significant (Table 4 Panel A). However, unlike the control group, the treated group’s
beliefs trend downward over the course of the experiment, becoming significantly less overconfident by
theendofthetask. Afterreceivingallsignals,thetreatedgroupis8percentagepointslessoverconfident
than the control group (p=0.02, q=0.05). The treatment effect on overconfidence is similar across the
two trials (−0.07 vs. −0.09), though only the estimate for HAP is (marginally) significant.
The estimated belief updating parameters confirm the widening gap in overconfidence between
treatment and control participants (Table 4 Panel B and Figure 5 Panel B). Across the two trials,
psychotherapy reduces β by about a third (0.21 units, p=0.03, q=0.07), while β slightly increases
H L
(by 0.06, not significant). As a result, we find that optimistic belief updating (β −β ), decreased
H L
by 0.27 units (p=0.08, q=0.16), a reduction of about a third compared to the control group mean.
Average responsiveness to signals (‘conservatism’, β¯) reduces slightly by -0.06 SD (p=0.30,q=0.40). In
other words, psychotherapy appears to have made participants treat feedback on their performance
substantially more evenhandedly, and be slightly less sensitive to feedback in general. As a result,
33Since good and bad news are on average equally likely, it also means that participants are on average quite un-
responsive to information. Forcing the model to treat positive and negative signals equivalently, we find the average
response to signals (“conservatism”) is β¯ = 0.29. While there was some difference in initial overconfidence between
samples, our estimates of the belief-updating parameters are quantitatively very similar between samples: for HAP we
estimateβ =0.73andβ =−0.13, whileforTHPPweestimateβ =0.67andβ =−0.03. Thistranslatesintovery
H L H L
similar estimates of asymmetry, of 0.85 and 0.69 respectively (both highly significant, p<0.001).
18

the treatment group exhibits lower levels of overconfidence at the end of the belief updating exercise.
Finally, just as control group parameters were similar between trials, the treatment effects on belief
updating are quantitatively strikingly similar between trials. For instance, the treatment effect on β
H
is −0.22 in the HAP sample (p<0.09, q=0.18) and −0.20 in the THPP sample (p=0.15, q=0.31).
Our main findings of reduced belief updating based on good news and reduced overoptimism in
response to treatment are robust to tighter sample restrictions in two main ways (Appendix Table
A.7, Figure 6).34 First, closely following Mobius et al. (2021), we re-estimate equation 3 dropping
participants and/or observations who did not update at all. Excluding participants who never update
atall(PanelB)increasesthemagnitudeofthetreatmenteffectonβ to−0.28andthatonasymmetry
H
to −0.38. Additionally dropping all instances where a participant did not update relative to their
previous guess (Panel C), the magnitude of the effects increases further to β = −0.36 and β −β =
H H L
−0.50. Second, excluding participants who update in the wrong direction (Panel D) yields similar
estimates of β and β −β compared to the baseline specification (Panel A). Finally, Panel E drops
H H L
all participants with at least one irrational update—including non-updated and updates in in the
wrong direction. In this highly restricted (and thus lower-powered) specification, we find qualitatively
similar results, though the estimates become statistically insignificant.35
6.4 Discussion
Howdothesefindingsrelatetotheoriesofpsychotherapyanddepression? First, ourresultsprovide
littlesupportforthetheoryofdepressiverealism. Thisinfluentialhypothesisproposesthatpeoplewith
depressionare‘sadderbutwiser’,basedon(mixed)cross-sectionalevidencethathealthyindividualsare
more overoptimistic than depressed individuals (Alloy and Abramson, 1979; Moore and Fresco, 2012).
Closest to our paper, Korn et al. (2014) find a significant cross-sectional correlation of depression
symptoms with less optimistic belief updating in a sample of 37 adults. We find only a small, non-
significant correlation in the same direction, and the causal effect of therapy—our main contribution—
goes in the opposite direction of that predicted by the hypothesis.36
Instead, our findings are broadly consistent with the underlying theory and proposed mechanisms
of forms of psychotherapy—including CBT, of which behavioral activation is a component—which
seek to make patients see themselves in a more realistic light as having both strengths and weaknesses
(Beck, 2020). Therapy reduced highly negative self-perceptions in a broad and subjective domain by
reducing feelings of being a failure, as described in Section 4. This more robust self-image might have
34Appendix Table A.6 explores what types of updating behaviors are contributing to our findings. We measure the
frequency of degenerate priors (4%) or posteriors (8%); of non-updates (13% of participants never update, 44% of
individual observations are coded as non-updates); of wrong-signed updates (18% of observations). 68% of participants
have at least one ‘irrational’ update (degenerate prior or posterior, non-update or wrong-signed update).
35Wealsomeasurecomprehensionandfindnomeaningfuldifferencesincomprehensionacrosstreatmentgroups(Table
A.6PanelG).Participantsanswered19comprehensionquestionsduringtheintroductionofthebeliefstask,andanswered
15 correctly on average.
36Appendix Table A.8 investigates if healthy individuals (those in remission) are more overoptimistic than depressed
individuals (those not in remission). To do this, we re-estimate equation (3) separately for the currently depressed, and
those in remission (having a PHQ-9 score below 10). We use only control participants for this exercise, since in the
treatment group current depression status is confounded with treatment. In line with depressive realism we find that
remission is positively (but not significantly) associated with overconfidence and asymmetric updating. Therefore, our
cross-sectional data are weakly consistent with the hypothesis, while treatment effects go in the opposite direction.
19

reduced participants’ psychological need for overconfidence in the specific novel economic domain we
studied (Blanton et al., 2001; Sherman and Cohen, 2006; Kolubinski et al., 2018).
Our findings have substantial potential to shift existing views in the scientific community. The
expert surveys we conducted reveal belief in the hypothesis of depressive realism. The median expert
predicted that the control group—which displays high rates of depression—would respond symmetri-
callytonegativeandpositivesignals(β = β ).37 Incontrast,wefoundmuchstrongerbelief-updating
L H
in response to positive than negative signals in the control group (β /β = −0.13). The median ex-
L H
pert forecast lies outside the 99% confidence interval for this estimate, and every single forecast lies
outside the 90% confidence interval.38 Experts also incorrectly expected treatment to increase initial
overconfidence—beforereceivinganysignals—andtoincreaseoptimisticupdating,presumablythrough
the channel of reduced depression and thus less depressive realism.39
Intriguingly, we find similar treatment effects in both trials. This suggests that depression is
unlikely to be the key mediator of the impacts on self-confidence and belief updating. A formal
mediation analysis presented in Figure A.6 confirms this. Therapy may thus change these economic
beliefs about oneself through channels beyond mental health. This finding merits future investigation.
7 Preferences
Wenextturntothelong-runimpactsoftherapyonthreeimportanteconomicpreferences: patience,
altruism, and risk tolerance. These preferences drive behaviors across many important economic do-
mains, such as consumption, investment, and public-goods provision. Existing research has examined
the correlation between depression and these preferences. We contribute to this literature by adding
evidence on the causal effect of psychotherapy for depression.
For each type of preference, we collected real-stakes experimental measures as well as secondary
validatedsurveymeasurestakenfromtheGlobalPreferenceSurvey(GPS)ofFalketal.(2016). Wealso
distinguish between specific choices participants make (such as how to split an experimental budget
between themselves and another recipient) and survey questions in which participants are asked to
report a broader self-perception (e.g. “How willing are you to give to good causes without expecting
anything in return?”). We report the effects on each measure and also combine measures of a given
preference into a standardized index following Anderson (2008).40
Altruism. A number of studies have found that depression negatively correlates with altruistic
37Forsimplicity,wedidnotseparatelyelicitforecastsaboutβ andβ butinsteadaskedexpertstopredicttheirratio
H L
(β /β =1), which is an intuitive measure of asymmetry.
L H
38Acaveattothisanalysisisthattheexpertforecastsurveydidnotallowfornegativevaluesofβ /β =1. However,
L H
none of the experts chose the smallest permitted value, suggesting that this is unlikely to have affected the results.
39Specifically, experts forecasted a change in the ratio ∆β /β = −0.22, while we estimated ∆β /β = +0.06. All
L H L H
forecasts lay outside the 90% confidence intervals. Expert forecasts for treatment effects on initial overconfidence also
went in the wrong direction (p=0.01).
40The construction of each variable is described in more detail in Appendix Table A.5. Comprehension was high
across tasks as my measured by a set of comprehension questions for each task. We additionally attempted to measure
susceptibility to “default effects” with a task in which participants received one good and had the option to switch to
another at a later date. This outcome showed little variation (over 95% of participants stuck with the default). We
thereforedropitinaccordancewithourpre-analysisplanwhichspecifiesdroppingbinaryoutcomesifover90%takethe
same action.
20

behavior (Alarcón and Forbes, 2017). Different explanations have been proposed, including that de-
pression takes the pleasure out of altruistic behavior or that depressed people are more focused on
their own needs. Experts predicted a modest causal effect of the HAP intervention on altruism, with
a median forecast of a 0.1 SD increase in the altruism index.
Wecollecttwomeasuresofaltruism. Thefirstisanincentivizeddictatorgame,inwhichparticipants
choose how much of Rs. 50 to send to another (unknown) participant in the experiment (keeping the
remainder for themselves). The secondary measure is a self-assessment survey question from the GPS.
This asks, on a scale of 1–10, “How willing are you to give to good causes without expecting anything
in return?”. The index variable combines these two outcomes.
Table 5 Panel A shows a 0.21 SD effect of treatment on the index of altruism (p=0.01, q=0.04).
The effect in the HAP trial is similar to the overall effect (0.25 SD), which is somewhat larger than the
median expert forecast of 0.1 SD (42 percent of experts lie outside the 90% CI). Considering the two
underlying measures separately, we find a significant increase in the self-assessment of altruism and a
non-significant but economically meaningful increase in giving in the dictator game. In the dictator
game, the mean giving in the control group was around Rs. 17 out of Rs. 50, in line with behavior in
dictator games in many other settings. The treatment group on average gave an additional Rs. 1 (or
around 0.1 SD) more, consistent with greater altruism (p=0.25). The treatment group also reported a
0.19 SD greater willingness to do good without expecting anything in return (p<0.05).
Patience. Theoretically, the effect of depression on patience is ambiguous. For example, the
anhedonia often experienced in depression may reduce the pleasure of immediate consumption, thus
makingpeopleappearmorepatientwhentradingoffimmediateandfutureconsumption(Lempertand
Pizzagalli, 2010). Alternatively, depression might make it difficult to attend to the future, reducing
patience (Keller et al., 2019). The expert forecasts indicate a modest belief that the HAP intervention
would increase patience, with a median forecast of a 0.12 SD increase in the patience index variable.
Our incentivized measure of patience is a “saving a note” task. We gave each participant a Rs.
100 bank note at the first session, and told them that if they could show the exact same note (with
matching serial number) at the second meeting, they would receive a Rs. 30 bonus. Returning the
note is a measure of participants’ patience and/or their ability to resist temptations.41 As secondary
unincentivized measures, we asked two self-assessment survey questions and a discount-parameter
elicitation using hypothetical money-earlier-or-later decisions. The survey questions asked, on a scale
of 1–10, to what extent the participant was willing “to give up something that is beneficial for you
today in order to benefit more from that in the future,” and willing “to complete tasks at the earliest,
and not leave them for later/postpone them”. The discounting elicitation uses a “ladder” design that,
through a sequence of choices between hypothetical sooner or later monetary amounts, finds a narrow
range for the participant’s indifference point. We elicited discounting between money today or in 12
months’ time, and between 12 and 24 months’ time.42
41Wechosethistasksinceimplementingfuture-datedmonetarypaymentsovertraditionaltime-framesusedinmoney
earlier or later designs was difficult to implement in this context. As with other monetary discounting tasks, behavior
in the saving-a-note task could also capture time-variation in liquidity constraints (Cohen et al., 2020).
42Fromthesechoices,wecomputepresentandfuturediscountfactorsδ andδ (underalinearutilityapproximation),
a b
as well as a present bias parameter β =δb/δa . For the 12 versus 24 month question, we increased all monetary amounts
by 20 percent relative to the today versus 12 month question. The staircase design does not allow for inconsistent
21

Table 5 Panel B shows a 0.18 SD treatment effect on the patience index—indicating higher
patience—which combines the above measures (p=0.03, q=0.05). The effect in the HAP trial is nearly
identical at 0.17 SD, and is close to the median expert forecast of 0.12 SD. While the point esti-
mates for all the patience measures are positive, the impact on the index is largely driven by the two
self-assessments. In particular, participants are 0.24 SD more likely to state that they are willing to
give something up for future benefits (p<0.01). In contrast, we find small and insignificant impacts
on whether participants return the bank notes, and on the discounting parameters inferred from the
money-earlier-or-later questions. While 79 percent of control group participants returned the bank
note, the treatment increased this fraction by 2 percentage points (not significant). In the hypotheti-
cal discounting task, participants discount the future heavily: δ and δ are both around 0.6. They are
a b
slightly future-biased on average, with mean β equal to 1.08.43 The treatment effects on the discount
factors are small, but we cannot rule out moderate increases in patience of the order of 0.2 SD.
Risk and loss tolerance. Some scholars have argued that depression reduces risk tolerance (see
Kamstra, Kramer and Levi (2003) for a discussion). Proposed mechanisms include that depression
reduces “sensation-seeking,” which is in turn associated with risk-taking. In addition, depression is
associated with pessimism, which might make risks less attractive. Recent correlational evidence,
however, casts doubt on this hypothesis (Cobb-Clark, Dahmann and Kettlewell, 2020). Experts did
not anticipate meaningful effects of the HAP intervention on risk preferences, with a median forecast
of a 0.05 SD increase in the index of risk tolerance.
Our two incentivized measures use lottery choice lists to elicit risk and loss tolerance.44 The risk
tolerance task elicits the monetary amount Y that makes the participant indifferent between receiving
Rs. 100 for sure versus a 50-50 lottery over winning Rs. Y/Rs. 200. The smaller is Y, the more risk
the participant is willing to tolerate (and Y = 0 corresponds to the risk-neutral case). Similarly, the
loss tolerance task elicits the monetary amount Z at which the participant is willing to accept a 50-50
lottery over gaining Rs. 100/losing Rs. Z, with losses to be deducted from the participant’s show-up
fee. In this case the larger is Z the more loss-tolerant the participant is (and Z = 100 corresponds
to risk neutrality with no loss aversion). Our unincentivized measure is taken from the GPS and asks
“In general, how willing you are to choose uncertain outcomes in real life?”, answered on a 1–10 scale.
Similarly-phrased questions have been used in many other settings and have been shown to predict
real-world risky decisions well across contexts (Dohmen et al., 2011).
choice (defined as a participant that rejects a smaller amount but accepts a larger amount). Due to an error in the
survey implementation, threemonetaryamountsinthe 12/24 monthinstrumentwere calibratedincorrectly, permitting
inconsistent responses. We find that 8 percent of participants are inconsistent, and code their values of δ and β as
b
missing.
43These estimates are comparable in magnitude to those from Bauer, Chytilová and Morduch (2012)’s study of self-
helpgroupmembersinKarnataka,India. Theyestimatemeanthree-monthdiscountratesof0.244betweenthepresent
and three months’ time, and 0.193 between 12 and 15 months’ time. These correspond to annual discount factors
δ
a
=(1/1.244)4 =0.42 and δ
b
=(1/1.193)4 =0.49. However, their estimates indicate present bias on average whereas we
find modest future bias.
44The choice lists begin with the most favorable option and work toward the least favorable. We allowed multiple
switchingonthesechoicelists,andtakethefirstswitchpointastheparticipant’schoice. Ifparticipantsmadeinconsistent
choices this was pointed out to them and they were given an opportunity to reconsider. We estimate the indifference
pointasthemidpointofthelast-acceptedandfirst-rejectedoption. Iftheparticipantrejected(accepted)alloptions,we
take the first (last) value as their indifference point.
22

We find small and non-significant effects on all three measures as well as a small (0.05 SD) increase
in the overall index of risk tolerance (Table 5 Panel C). Psychotherapy increases the index measure
by a small and statistically insignificant 0.03 SD, very similar to the median expert prediction of 0.05
SD. In the risk tolerance task, the control group on average chooses Y=53. This amount is about Rs.
2 lower in the treatment group, indicating slightly higher risk tolerance (not significant). In the loss
tolerance task, the control group chooses on average Z=73, and this amount is about Rs. 1 higher in
the treatment group, indicating slightly higher loss tolerance (not significant). Consistent with these
choices, treated individuals on average assess their willingness to choose uncertain outcomes by 0.05
SD higher (not significant).
7.1 Discussion
Our findings add to the nascent literature estimating the causal effects of psychotherapy on eco-
nomic preferences. Closest to our work is Blattman, Jamison and Sheridan (2017), which shows that
CBT designed to reduce impulsive behavior successfully increased patience and reduced violent behav-
ior in a population of criminally-engaged young men Liberia. Their intervention differs substantially
fromthosewestudy, sinceitdidnottargetdepressionanddidnotimprovementalhealth. Alsorelated
is Angelucci and Bennett (2021), who show mixed evidence of pharmacological treatment of depres-
sion affecting risk tolerance.45 Therapy and pharmacological treatments for depression may, however,
operate through different mechanisms.
The positive effects of psychotherapy on the aggregate index measures of patience and altruism are
broadly in line with expert predictions. However, it is important to note that these effects are driven
morebychangesinself-assessmentsthanbychangesinactualexperimentalchoices. Oneinterpretation
of these findings is that therapy did not affect the extent to which people actually behaved patiently
or altruistically, but changed how they interpreted their own behavior, in line with a more robust
self-image. While patience and altruism are typically viewed as normatively desirable, the valence of
risk tolerance is less clear, which might explain the smaller effects observed for this outcome.
However, we cannot rule out moderate effects on real behaviors in line with the changed self-
assessments, especially in the case of altruism. Self-evaluations may also reflect real behavior across a
broader set of domains and a longer time-frame than captured by the experimental tasks. An alterna-
tive interpretation is thus that psychotherapy changed not just self-perceptions, but also behaviors, in
the direction of greater patience and altruism.
As with the self-confidence outcomes, the pattern of results suggest that therapy affected patience
and altruism through channels other than current levels of depression. The effects were similar in
both trials, despite only HAP showing an impact on depression.46 Moreover, a correlational analysis
reported in Appendix Table A.9 shows weak associations of current depression status with each of
45Specifically,AngelucciandBennett(2021)findthatbeingprescribedantidepressantsdoesnotaffectalottery-based
measure of risk tolerance or self-assessed risk attitudes, similar to our findings. However, they do find evidence of
reductions in self-reported risky behaviors such willingness to ride a motorcycle without a helmet.
46The most notable difference is that we do see suggestive evidence of a treatment effect in the Saving-a-Note task
in the THPP trial. Here, only 71 percent of untreated participants saved the note, increasing by 12 percentage points
among the treated and significant at the 10 percent level.
23

these preferences.47 A mediation analysis reported in Figure A.6 confirms that changes in current
PHQ-9 scores do not explain the effects. Intriguingly, a measure of behavioral activation—being
active and engaged in pleasurable activities—is the strongest mediator of the effects on patience and
especially altruism, explaining a majority of each effect. This suggests that behavioral activation—the
focus of the therapy interventions we study–both improves mental health and independently affects
self-perceptions.
8 Work, Consumption, and Other Outcomes
We find no evidence of significant impacts of the treatments on work-related outcomes, including
survey-based measures of labor supply and employment (Table 6, Panel A) and revealed-preference
measures of willingness to take on paid work and productivity (Panel B). In line with these results, we
also find no impacts on consumption (Panel C). Finally, we find some evidence of improved sleep due
to the treatment but no impacts on other exploratory outcomes such as female empowerment, IPV, or
loneliness (Panel D).48
Labor supply and employment. Wedetectnosignificantimpactsonanyofthesurveymeasures
of labor supply and employment (Table 6 Panel A), including whether people were engaged in paid
work, how many hours of paid work they did in the past week, or how much they earned in the past
month. Similarly, we find no significant difference in the fraction of people who say they are available
to take on an employment opportunity. Among the unemployed, we find no difference in the number
of job search hours per week. These results are consistent with Baranov et al. (2020), who also find no
effects of psychotherapy for depression on employment in a sample of women in Pakistan. A caveat
is that, due to limited power, we cannot rule out modest improvements (or reductions). For instance,
the 95% confidence interval for effects on employment rates extends from -7 to +5 percentage points,
compared to a control-group mean of 25%.
Table 6 Panel B shows no evidence of impacts on revealed-preference measures of productivity
and willingness to take on paid work (i.e. labor supply at the margin). First, we find no evidence
of impacts on the number of bracelets made as part of the work task used to measure confidence
and belief updating (see Section 6). Since this incentivized task involves the kind of manual skills
often required in work available to our study participants, this outcome arguably provides a relevant
measure of work productivity. Second, we find no impacts of the treatment on incentivized reservation
wages—the minimum wage participants were willing to work at—when asked to make a large, fixed
number of bracelets from home (using as much time as needed), regardless of their performance in the
task. Finally, we also find no impacts on the take-up of the performance-based hiring scheme. Recall
that signing up for this hiring scheme was potentially lucrative for participants who performed above
47Whilepatienceandrisktoleranceindicesareweaklynegativelyassociatedwithcurrentdepression,altruismisinstead
weaklypositivelyassociated. Thecoefficientsforpatienceandaltruismarelessthanhalfaslargeinmagnitudeastheour
estimated treatment effects, which further goes to suggest that the treatment effects are not well-explained by changes
in contemporaneous depression.
48We attempted to measure schooling attainment of school age and adult children, and reading and writing ability of
children. We find no evidence of meaningful effects, but this is not particularly surprising because of high dispersion in
children’s ages in the sample: many were too young to be in school, or too old to be meaningfully affected.
24

the median in the sample. Given the treatment effects on final confidence (Table 4 Panel A), one may
have expected treatment to reduce take-up of the hiring scheme. It did not.49
Expenditures. Giventhelackofimpactsonlaborsupply,earnings,andproductivity,itisperhaps
not surprising that we observe little impact on expenditures and consumption (Table 6 Panel C).
We find no significant impacts on overall consumption or on individual categories such as food or
durable goods. We can rule out increases in monthly expenditures greater than 10 percent of control-
group levels. Improved mental health also did not translate into significant reductions in other health
expenditures, unlike in the short-run study (Patel et al., 2017; Weobong et al., 2017).
Female empowerment and IPV.Wealsofindnosignificanttreatmenteffectsonfemaleempow-
erment and intimate partner violence (Table 6 Panel D). An index of female empowerment variables
shows a positive point estimate of 0.06 SD across the entire sample, but this is not statistically signif-
icant, and few of the constituent variables show sizable effects (Appendix Table A.11). The estimated
effects on female empowerment are less precise and smaller than in Baranov et al. (2020), though we
cannot reject the effects found in their study. Similarly, while we find some suggestive evidence of
reduced intimate partner violence (IPV) in the treatment group, these estimates are not statistically
significant. Across the entire sample (restricted to female participants), the corresponding index de-
creases by 0.12 SD, driven by a significant 67 percent reduction in reported instances of forced sex,
from 9 percent to 3 percent of women (Appendix Table A.12).
Sleep, loneliness, and locus of control. We find a statistically significant positive effect of
0.2 SD on an index of three self-reported sleep-related variables: the number of hours slept in the
preceding night, sleep quality, and the number of hours spent in bed but not asleep (entering the index
negatively). The positive effect on the index is driven by a 16-minute increase in sleep duration per
night, and a 0.20 SD improvement in sleep quality. This provides rare evidence of an intervention
capable of improving sleep quality in developing-country settings (Bessone et al., 2021; Rao et al.,
2021). In contrast, we find no evidence of impacts on loneliness or locus of control.
8.1 Discussion
The above findings contribute to the literature studying the causal impacts of therapy on work-
related outcomes. Previous work has found evidence of short-run impacts of therapy on brief survey
measures of labor supply, particularly self-reported days of work missed (Patel et al., 2017; Lund et al.,
2010). We contribute to this evidence base by studying longer-run impacts and by using revealed-
preference measures of productivity and labor supply in addition to survey measures of employment
and earnings. Our findings suggest that therapy does not have long-run impacts on work-related
outcomes in this context. While our statistical power is limited, point estimates are small across
outcomes and we can rule out moderate-sized positive effects. We interpret our findings as showing
both a lack of real-world labor supply responses—which could be attributed to low labor demand or to
49Oneinterpretationofthisresultisthatpeople’slaborsupplydecisionsareconstrainedbyotherfactorssuchassocial
normsorchildcare,thuslimitinganypotentialimpactsoftherapyonchoicesinthehiringscheme. Alternatively,people
might optimistically update their beliefs to feel good about themselves but then revert to their priors in higher-stakes
choices, as discussed in Mobius et al. (2021). We find some evidence in support of this hypothesis (Appendix Table
A.10).
25

constraints on women’s work outside the home—but also no effects on willingness to take on flexible
work from home.
Thenulleffectonemploymentcontrastswiththeforecastsofexperts. Themedianexpertpredicted
a 0.12 SD increase in employment. The true empirical estimate of −0.01 SD was equal to the 13th
percentile of the expert forecasts. The median expert predicted more modest effects (+0.06 SD) on
consumption, which was close to the true empirical estimate of 0.05 SD. Ultimately, even a very
effective psychotherapy intervention on its own was not sufficient to unleash greater labor supply and
earnings, and help recipients escape poverty.
9 Conclusion
Thisstudypresentsthelong-runeffectsoftwotrialsofpsychotherapyfordepression. Mostdirectly
relevant for policy, we document that the mental-health benefits of the Healthy Activity Program—
an inexpensive, scalable therapy delivered by a non-specialist—are remarkably persistent. Therapy
increased remission from depression by 13 percentage points five years after the brief intervention was
delivered. Accounting for these long-run impacts further increases estimates of the (already-high) cost
effectiveness of such therapies. We calculate that being offered the HAP treatment averted 9.1 months
ofdepressiononaverageoverfiveyears,atacostofatmost$7.33permonthofdepressionaverted. This
result reinforces calls for expanding access to psychotherapy in India and similar contexts worldwide
(Singla et al., 2017).
As the supply of therapy grows in the developing world, studying potential demand-side barriers
becomes increasingly important. Low perceptions of treatment efficacy could be a barrier to seeking
treatment, possibly due to lack of familiarity. We document that receiving therapy increases people’s
beliefs regarding the efficacy of therapy. Future work may explore whether such changes in beliefs are
transmittedinsocialnetworksandleadtoincreaseddemandfortherapyamongpeers. Ourresultsalso
suggest that regulation and/or information interventions that help people identify effective treatments
could be beneficial.
This paper also takes a first step towards providing a behavioral-science view of psychotherapy,
documenting its long-run effects on beliefs and preferences. We find that therapy durably changes
recipients’beliefsaboutthemselves. Itreducesextremelynegativeself-perceptionswhichareacommon
symptom of depression. It also increases participants’ self-assessed levels of patience and altruism.
However, therapy does not simply cause patients to see themselves more positively across the board.
Italsocausesthemtoseethemselvesmoreaccurately incertaindomains. Whenfacedwithanovelwork
opportunity, therapy reduced overconfidence by making people react to feedback more evenhandedly.
This finding is arguably consistent with the theory and goals of CBT (Beck, 2020). Of course, our
study only captures certain aspects of beliefs and economic preferences, and omits many other aspects
of how people perceive themselves and the world, which future research should explore.
Finally, this paper reports that even a highly-effective psychotherapy intervention which durably
reduced depression did not translate into increases in employment and earnings among low-income
adults in India. At least in this context, therapy did not prove to be a tool for long-term reductions in
26

poverty. One explanation could be that other constraints such as social norms depress women’s work
outside the household in the study context (Fletcher, Pande and Moore, 2017). Pairing psychotherapy
withotherinterventionsmightbenecessarytounlocktheeconomicbenefitsofimproved mentalhealth
(Bossuroy et al., 2022). Yet the remarkably persistent effects of psychotherapy on mental health, to-
gether with the short-run reductions in health expenditures documented in previous work (Patel et al.,
2017; Weobong et al., 2017), already make a strong policy case for such psychotherapy interventions
in low-income contexts.
27

References
Alarcón, Gabriela, and Erika E. Forbes. 2017. “Prosocial Behavior and Depression: a Case for
Developmental Gender Differences.” Child and Developmental Psychiatry, 4(2): 117–127.
Albert, Paul R. 2015. “Why is depression more prevalent in women?” Journal of psychiatry &
neuroscience: JPN, 40(4): 219.
Alloy, L.B., and L.Y. Abramson. 1979. “Judgment of contingency in depressed and nondepressed
students: Sadder but wiser.” Journal of Experimental Psychology, 108(4): 441–485.
Anderson, Michael L. 2008. “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early
Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects.”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103(484): 1481–1495.
Angelucci, Manuela, and Daniel Bennett. 2021. “The Economic Impact of Depression Treatment
in India.” IZA DP No. 14393.
Baranov, Victoria, Sonia Bhalotra, Pietro Biroli, and Joanna Maselko. 2020. “Maternal
Depression, Women’s Empowerment, and Parental Investment: Evidence from a Randomized Con-
trolled Trial.” American Economic Review, 110(3): 824–59.
Barker, Nathan, Gharad T Bryan, Dean Karlan, Angela Ofori-Atta, and Christopher R
Udry. 2021. “Mental Health Therapy as a Core Strategy for Increasing Human Capital: Evidence
from Ghana.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Barth, Jürgen, Thomas Munder, Heike Gerger, Eveline Nüesch, Sven Trelle, Hansjörg
Znoj, Peter Jüni, and Pim Cuijpers. 2016. “Comparative efficacy of seven psychotherapeutic
interventions for patients with depression: a network meta-analysis.” Focus, 14(2): 229–243.
Bauer, Michal, Julie Chytilová, and Jonathan Morduch. 2012. “Behavioral Foundations of
Microcredit: Experimental and Survey Evidence from Rural India.” American Economic Review,
102(2): 1118–1139.
Beard, C, KJ Hsu, LS Rifkin, AB Busch, and T Björgvinsson.2016.“ValidationofthePHQ-9
in a psychiatric sample.” Journal of Affective Disorders, 193: 267–273.
Beck, Judith S. 2020. Cognitive behavior therapy: Basics and beyond. Guilford Publications.
Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole.2002.“Self-confidenceandpersonalmotivation.” Thequarterly
journal of economics, 117(3): 871–915.
Benjamin, Daniel J. 2019. “Errors in probabilistic reasoning and judgment biases.” Handbook of
Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foundations 1, 2: 69–186.
Bessone, Pedro, GautamRao, FrankSchilbach, HeatherSchofield, andMattieToma.2021.
“The economic consequences of increasing sleep among the urban poor.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 136(3): 1887–1941.
Blanton, Hart, Brett W. Pelham, Tracy DeHart, and Mauricio Carvallo. 2001. “Overconfi-
dence as Dissonance Reduction.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 37(5): 373–385.
Blattman, Christopher, Julian C Jamison, and Margaret Sheridan. 2017. “Reducing Crime
and Violence: Experimental Evidence from Cognitive Behavioral Therapy in Liberia.” Am. Econ.
Rev., 107(4): 1165–1206.
Bossuroy, Thomas, Markus Goldstein, Dean Karlan, Harounan Kazianga, William Pari-
ente, Patrick Premand, Catherine Thomas, Christopher Udry, Julia Vaillant, and
Kelsey Wright. 2022. “Tackling psychosocial and capital constraints to alleviate poverty.” Nature.
Buser, Thomas, Leonie Gerhards, and Joël Van Der Weele. 2018. “Responsiveness to feedback
as a personal trait.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 56(2): 165–192.
Chernozhukov, Victor, Denis Chetverikov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, Christian
Hansen, and Whitney Newey. 2017. “Double/debiased/neyman machine learning of treatment
effects.” American Economic Review, 107(5): 261–65.
Chernozhukov, Victor, Denis Chetverikov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, Christian
Hansen, Whitney Newey, and James Robins. 2016. “Double/debiased machine learning for
treatment and causal parameters.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.00060.
28

Chernozhukov, Victor, MertDemirer, EstherDuflo, andIvanFernandez-Val.2018.“Generic
machine learning inference on heterogenous treatment effects in randomized experiments.” National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Cobb-Clark, Deborah A., Sarah C. Dahmann, and Nathan Kettlewell. 2020. “Depression,
Risk Preferences and Risk-taking Behavior.” Journal of Human Resources, 0419–10183R1.
Cohen, Jonathan, Keith Marzilli Ericson, David Laibson, and John Myles White. 2020.
“Measuring time preferences.” Journal of Economic Literature, 58(2): 299–347.
Coutts, Alexander. 2019. “Good news and bad news are still news: Experimental evidence on belief
updating.” Experimental Economics, 22(2): 369–395.
Cronin, Christopher J, Matthew P Forsstrom, and Nicholas W Papageorge. 2020. “What
goodaretreatmenteffectswithouttreatment? Mentalhealthandthereluctancetousetalktherapy.”
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cuijpers, Pim, Erica Weitz, Eirini Karyotaki, Judy Garber, and Gerhard Andersson.2015.
“The effects of psychological treatment of maternal depression on children and parental functioning:
a meta-analysis.” Eur. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry, 24(2): 237–245.
Cuijpers, Pim, FilipSmit, ErnstBohlmeijer, StevenHollon, andGerhardAndersson.2010.
“Efficacy of cognitive-behavioural therapy and other psychological treatments for adult depression:
meta-analytic study of publication bias.” The British Journal of Psychiatry, 196: 173–178.
Cuijpers, Pim, Ioana A Cristea, Eirini Karyotaki, Mirjam Reijnders, and Marcus JH
Huibers. 2016. “How effective are cognitive behavior therapies for major depression and anxiety
disorders? A meta-analytic update of the evidence.” World psychiatry, 15(3): 245–258.
Danz, David, Lise Vesterlund, and Alistair J Wilson. 2020. “Belief elicitation: Limiting truth
telling with information on incentives.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Delavande, Adeline, Xavier Giné, and David McKenzie. 2011. “Measuring subjective expecta-
tionsindevelopingcountries: Acriticalreviewandnewevidence.” Journalofdevelopmenteconomics,
94(2): 151–163.
DellaVigna, Stefano, Devin Pope, and Eva Vivalt. 2019. “Predict science to improve science.”
Science, 366(6464): 428–429.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, Uwe Sunde, Jürgen Schupp, and Gert G.
Wagner. 2011. “Individual Risk Attitudes: Measurement, Determinants, and Behavioral Conse-
quences.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(3): 522–550.
Eil, David, and Justin M Rao. 2011. “The Good News-Bad News Effect: Asymmetric Processing
of Objective Information about Yourself.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3(2): 114–
138.
Ertac, Seda. 2011. “Does self-relevance affect information processing? Experimental evidence on
the response to performance and non-performance feedback.” Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization, 80(3): 532–545.
Falk, Armin, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, Benjamin Enke, David Huffman, and Uwe
Sunde. 2018. “Global Evidence on Economic Preferences.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
133(4): 1645–1692.
Falk, Armin, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde. 2016. “The
preference survey module: A validated instrument for measuring risk, time, and social preferences.”
IZA Discussion Paper No. 9674.
Fletcher, Erin, Rohini Pande, and Charity Maria Troyer Moore. 2017. “Women and work in
India: Descriptive evidence and a review of potential policies.”
Friedrich, M.J. 2017. “Depression is the leading cause of disability around the world.” JAMA,
317(15): 1517.
Fuhr, Daniela, Benedict Weobong, Anisha Lazarus, Fiona Vanobberghen, Helen A Weiss,
Daisy Radha Singla, Hanani Tabana, Ejma Afonso, Aveena De Sa, Ethel D’Souza,
AkankashaJoshi, PriyaKorgaonkar, RevathiKrishna, PriceLeShawndra, AtifRahman,
and Vikram Patel. 2019. “Delivering the Thinking Healthy Programme for perinatal depression
through peers: an individually randomised controlled trial in India.” Lancet Psychiatry, 6: 115–127.
29

Haushofer, Johannes, Robert Mudida, and Jeremy P Shapiro.2020.“Thecomparativeimpact
of cash transfers and a psychotherapy program on psychological and economic well-being.” National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Heller, Sara B, Anuj K Shah, Jonathan Guryan, Jens Ludwig, Sendhil Mullainathan, and
Harold A Pollack. 2017. “Thinking, fast and slow? Some field experiments to reduce crime and
dropout in Chicago.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(1): 1–54.
Huang, Rurui, Chunli Yan, Yumei Tian, Beimei Lei, Dongqi Yang, Dan Liu, and Jun Lei.
2020. “Effectiveness of peer support intervention on perinatal depression: A systematic review and
meta-analysis.” Journal of Affective Disorders, 276(1): 788–796.
Indu, Pillaveetil Sathyadas, Thekkethayyil Viswanathan Anilkumar, Krishnapillai Vi-
jayakumar, K.A. Kumar, P. Sankara Sarma, Saradamma Remadevi, and Chittaranjan
Andrade. 2018. “Reliability and validity of PHQ-9 when administered by health workers for de-
pression screening among women in primary care.” Asian Journal of Psychiatry, 37: 10–14.
Kamstra, Mark J, Lisa A Kramer, and Maurice D Levi. 2003. “Winter Blues: A SAD Stock
Market Cycle.” American Economic Review, 93(1): 324–343.
Keller, Arielle S, John E Leikauf, Bailey Holt-Gosselin, Brooke R Staveland, and
Leanne M Williams.2019.“Payingattentiontoattentionindepression.” Translationalpsychiatry,
9(1): 1–12.
Kessler, Ronald C, and Philip S Wang. 2009. “Epidemiology of depression.” In I. H. Gotlib & C.
L. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression. The Guilford Press., 5–22.
Kolubinski, Daniel C., Daniel Frings, Ana V. Nikčević, Jacqueline A. Lawrence, and
Marcantonio M. Spada. 2018. “A systematic review and meta-analysis of CBT interventions
based on the Fennell model of low self-esteem.” Psychiatry Research, 267: 296–305.
Korn, C W, T Sharot, H Walter, H R Heekeren, and R J Dolan. 2014. “Depression is
related to an absence of optimistically biased belief updating about future life events.” Psychol.
Med., 44(3): 579–592.
Köszegi, Botond. 2006. “Ego utility, overconfidence, and task choice.” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 4(4): 673–707.
Kroenke, Kurt, Robert L Spitzer, and Janet B W Williams. 2002. “The PHQ-9: a new
depression diagnostic and severity measure.” Psychiatr. Ann., 32(9): 509–515.
Lempert, Karolina M., and Diego A. Pizzagalli. 2010. “Delay discounting and future-directed
thinking in anhedonic individuals.” Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry,
41(3): 258–264.
Löwe, Bernd, Irini Schenkel, Caroline Carney-Doebbeling, and Claus Göbel.2006.“Respon-
siveness of the PHQ-9 to psychopharmacological depression treatment.” Psychosomatics, 47(1): 62–
67.
Lund, Crick, Alison Breen, Alan J Flisher, Ritsuko Kakuma, Joanne Corrigall, John A
Joska, Leslie Swartz, and Vikram Patel. 2010. “Poverty and common mental disorders in low
and middle income countries: A systematic review.” Soc. Sci. Med., 71(3): 517–528.
Lund, Crick, Kate Orkin, Marc Witte, Thandi Davies, Johannes Haushofer, Judy Bass,
Paul Bolton, Sarah Murray, Laura Murray, Wietse Tol, Graham Thornicroft, and
Vikram Patel.2021.“Theeconomiceffectsofmentalhealthinterventionsinlowandmiddle-income
countries.” Working Paper.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate. 2005. “CEO overconfidence and corporate investment.”
The journal of finance, 60(6): 2661–2700.
Manea, Laura, Simon Gilbody, and Dean McMillan.2012.“Optimalcut-offscorefordiagnosing
depression with the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9): a meta-analysis.” Canadian Medical
Association Journal, 184(3): E191–E196.
Maselko, Joanna, Siham Sikander, Elizabeth L Turner, Lisa M Bates, Ikhlaq Ahmad,
Najia Atif, Victoria Baranov, Sonia Bhalotra, Amina Bibi, Tayyaba Bibi, Samina Bilal,
Pietro Biroli, Esther Chung, John A Gallis, Ashley Hagaman, Anam Jamil, Katherine
LeMasters, Karen O’Donnell, Elissa Scherer, Maria Sharif, Ahmed Waqas, Ahmed
30

Zaidi, Shaffaq Zulfiqar, and Atif Rahman.2020.“Effectivenessofapeer-delivered,psychosocial
interventiononmaternaldepressionandchilddevelopmentat3yearspostnatal: aclusterrandomised
trial in Pakistan.” The Lancet Psychiatry, 7(9): 775–787.
McMillan, Dean, Simon Gilbody, and David Richards. 2010. “Defining successful treatment
outcome in depression using the PHQ-9: a comparison of methods.” Journal of affective disorders,
127(1-3): 122–129.
Mobius, Markus M, Muriel Niederle, Paul Niehaus, and Tanya S Rosenblat. 2021. “Man-
aging Self-Confidence: Theory and Experimental Evidence.” Management Science (forthcoming).
Moore, Don A, and Paul J Healy. 2008. “The trouble with overconfidence.” Psychological review,
115(2): 502.
Moore, Michael T, and David M Fresco. 2012. “Depressive realism: A meta-analytic review.”
Clinical psychology review, 32(6): 496–509.
Patel, Vikram, Benedict Weobong, Helen A Weiss, Arpita Anand, Bhargav Bhat,
Basavraj Katti, Sona Dimidjian, Ricardo Araya, Steve D Hollon, Michael King, Lak-
shmi Vijayakumar, A-La Park, David McDaid, Terry Wilson, Richard Velleman,
Betty R Kirkwood, and Christopher G Fairburn. 2017. “The Healthy Activity Program
(HAP), a lay counsellor-delivered brief psychological treatment for severe depression, in primary
care in India: a randomised controlled trial.” Lancet, 389(10065): 176–185.
Patel, Vikram, Gregory Simon, Neerja Chowdhary, Sylvia Kaaya, and Ricardo Araya.
2009. “Packages of Care for Depression in Low- and Middle-Income Countries.” PLoS Med.,
6(10): e1000159.
Patel, Vikram, Helen Weiss, Neerja Chowdhary, Smita Naik, Sulochana Pednekar,
Sudipto Chatterjee, Mary De Silva, Bhargav Bhat, Ricardo Araya, Michael King, Gre-
gory Simon, Helen Verdeli, and Betty Kirkwood. 2010. “Effectiveness of an intervention led
by lay counsellors for depressive and anxiety disorders in primary care in Goa, India (MANAS): a
cluster randomised controlled trial.” Lancet, 376(9758): 2086–2095.
Patel, Vikram, Neerja Chowdhary, Atif Rahman, and Helen Verdeli.2011.“Improvingaccess
to psychological treatments: Lessons from developing countries.” Behav. Res. Ther., 49(9): 523–528.
Patel, Vikram, Shekhar Saxena, Crick Lund, Graham Thornicroft, Florence Baingana,
Paul Bolton, Dan Chisholm, Pamela Y Collins, Janice L Cooper, Julian Eaton, et al.
2018. “The Lancet Commission on global mental health and sustainable development.” The Lancet,
392(10157): 1553–1598.
Patel, Vikram, Shuiyuan Xiao, Hanhui Chen, Fahmy Hanna, A T Jotheeswaran, Dan
Luo, Rachana Parikh, Eesha Sharma, Shamaila Usmani, Yu Yu, Benjamin G Druss,
and Shekhar Saxena. 2016. “The magnitude of and health system responses to the mental health
treatment gap in adults in India and China.” Lancet, 388(10063): 3074–3084.
Patel, V, R Araya, N Chowdhary, M King, B Kirkwood, S Nayak, G Simon, and H A
Weiss. 2008. “Detecting common mental disorders in primary care in India: a comparison of five
screening questionnaires.” Psychol. Med., 38(2): 221–228.
Rahman, Atif, Abid Malik, Siham Sikander, Christopher Roberts, and Francis Creed.
2008. “Cognitive behaviour therapy-based intervention by community health workers for mothers
with depression and their infants in rural Pakistan: a cluster-randomise controlled trial.” Lancet,
372: 902–909.
Rahman, Atif, Jane Fisher, Peter Bower, Stanley Luchters, Thach Tran, M Taghi Yasamy,
Shekhar Saxena, and Waquas Waheed. 2013. “Interventions for common perinatal mental dis-
orders in women in low- and middle-income countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis.”
Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 91: 593–601.
Rao, Gautam, Susan Redline, Frank Schilbach, Heather Schofield, and Mattie Toma.2021.
“Informing sleep policy through field experiments.” Science, 374(6567): 530–533.
Ridley, Matthew, Gautam Rao, Frank Schilbach, and Vikram Patel. 2020. “Poverty, depres-
sion, and anxiety: Causal evidence and mechanisms.” Science, 370(6522).
Russo, J Edward, and Paul JH Schoemaker. 1992. “Managing overconfidence.” Sloan
31

management review, 33(2): 7–17.
Sagar, Rajesh, Rakhi Dandona, Gopalkrishna Gururaj, RS Dhaliwal, Aditya Singh, Alize
Ferrari, Tarun Dua, Atreyi Ganguli, Mathew Varghese, Joy K Chakma, et al. 2020.
“The burden of mental disorders across the states of India: the Global Burden of Disease Study
1990–2017.” The Lancet Psychiatry, 7(2): 148–161.
Santomauro, Damian F, Ana M Mantilla Herrera, Jamileh Shadid, Peng Zheng, Charlie
Ashbaugh, David M Pigott, Cristiana Abbafati, Christopher Adolph, Joanne O Amlag,
Aleksandr Y Aravkin, et al. 2021. “Global prevalence and burden of depressive and anxiety
disorders in 204 countries and territories in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.” The Lancet,
398(10312): 1700–1712.
Sapiens Lab. 2021. “Mental Health Has Bigger Challenges Than Stigma.” Rapid Report.
Schwardmann, Peter, and Joel Van der Weele. 2019. “Deception and self-deception.” Nature
human behaviour, 3(10): 1055–1061.
Selten, Reinhard. 1998. “Axiomatic characterization of the quadratic scoring rule.” Experimental
Economics, 1(1): 43–61.
Sherman, David K., and Geoffrey L. Cohen. 2006. “The Psychology of Self-defense: Self-
Affirmation Theory.” In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology. 183–242. Elsevier.
Sikander, Siham, Anisha Lazarus, Omer Bangash, Daniela Fuhr, Benedict Weobong,
Revathi Krishna, Ikhlaq Ahmad, Helen Weiss, LeShwandra Price, Atif Rahman, and
Vikram Patel. 2015. “The Effectiveness and Cost-Effectiveness of the Peer-Delivered Thinking
Healthy Programme for Perinatal Depression in Pakistan and India: the SHARE Study Protocol for
Randomised Controlled Trials.” Trials, 16(534).
Singla, Daisy, Benedict Weobong, Abhijit Nadkarni, Neerja Chowdhary, Sachin Shinde,
Arpita Anand, Christopher Fairburn, Sona Dimijdan, Richard Velleman, Helen Weiss,
and Vikram Patel. 2014. “Improving the scalability of psychological treatments in developing
countries: An evaluation of peer-led therapy quality assessment in Goa, India.” 60(100): 53–59.
Singla, Daisy R, Brandon A Kohrt, Laura K Murray, Arpita Anand, Bruce F Chorpita,
and Vikram Patel.2017.“PsychologicalTreatmentsfortheWorld: LessonsfromLow-andMiddle-
Income Countries.”
Steinert, Christiane, Mareike Hofmann, Johannes Kruse, and Falk Leichsenring. 2014.
“Relapseratesafterpsychotherapyfordepression–stablelong-termeffects? Ameta-analysis.” Journal
of Affective Disorders, 168: 107–118.
Terlizzi, E.P., and B. Zablotsky. 2020. “Mental health treatment among adults: United States,
2019.” NCHS Data Brief, 380.
Valley, Zahir, and Lameze Abrahams. 2016. “The effectiveness of peer-delivered services in the
management of mental health conditions: a meta-analysis of studies from low-and middle-income
countries.” International Journal for the Advancement of Counselling, 38: 330–344.
Verma, Shankey, and Aditi Mishra. 2020. “Depression, anxiety, and stress and socio-demographic
correlates among general Indian public during COVID-19.” 66(8): 756–762.
Weobong, Benedict, HelenAWeiss, DavidMcDaid, DaisyRSingla, StevenDHollon, Ab-
hijit Nadkarni, A-La Park, Bhargav Bhat, Basavraj Katti, Arpita Anand, and Others.
2017. “Sustained effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of the Healthy Activity Programme, a brief psy-
chological treatment for depression delivered by lay counsellors in primary care: 12-month follow-up
of a randomised controlled trial.” PLoS Med., 14(9).
WHO. 2010. “mhGAP intervention guide for mental, neurological and substance use disorders in
non-specialized health settings.” Technical documents, World Health Organization.
WHO.2015.“Thinkinghealthy: amanualforpsychosocialmanagementofperinataldepression,WHO
generic field-trial version 1.0, 2015.” Technical documents, World Health Organization.
Zimmermann, Florian. 2020. “The Dynamics of Motivated Beliefs.” American Economic Review,
110(2): 337–361.
32

10 Figures and Tables
Maselko et al. 2020
Baranov et al. 2020 N=585
N=572
Healthy Activity Program N=493
Thinking Healthy Program Peer Delivered N=280
)sDS(
stceffe
tnemtaerT
5.1
1
5.
0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Time after Enrollment (years)
Figure 1: Treatment effects of HAP and THPP compared to previous work
Notes: This figure contextualizes our results on HAP and THPP with the results of previous RCTs studying the effects of psycho-
logical treatment on depression in low- and middle-income countries, focusing on peer-delivered interventions.
• The studies are primarily taken from the literature review in Singla et al. (2017), as well as meta-analyses of peer-delivered
and non-specialist interventions by Huang et al. (2020) and by Valley and Abrahams (2016).
• Weaddedfurtherstudiesthatwereconductedafterthepublicationofthosereviews. TheseRCTsinlow-andmiddle-income
countries were sourced using searches of Google Scholar and PubMed, using the search terms (“depression” OR “anxiety”)
AND(“peer-delivered” OR"peer” OR“non-specialist” OR“interpersonal” OR“volunteer”)AND(“trial” OR“randomized” OR
“random” OR “controlled” OR “experiment”) AND (“international” OR “LMIC” OR “low- and middle-income” OR “middle-
income”), and further supplemented with the METAPSY database (https://evidencebasedpsychotherapies.shinyapps.
io/metapsy/).
• Details of the papers included can be found in Appendix Table A.16. Treatment effects are converted to standardized units
to adjust for the different depression metrics used across studies.
33

1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0
ytilibaborP
evitalumuC
Panel A: CDF of PHQ−9 score in HAP at 5 years
Control
Treatment
0 5 10 15 20 25
PHQ−9 Score
1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0
ytilibaborP
evitalumuC
Panel B: CDF of PHQ−9 score in THPP at 4 years
Control
Treatment
0 5 10 15 20 25
PHQ−9 Score
Figure 2: Effects on distribution of depression symptom severity
Notes: This figure shows cdfs of PHQ-9 scores at the endline follow-up survey for HAP 5 years after treatment (Panel A) and for
THPP 4 years after treatment (Panel B). Based on Kroenke, Spitzer and Williams (2002), the PHQ-9 screening thresholds are as
follows: a score of 5 and above indicates at least mild depression, a score of 10 and above indicates at least moderate depression,
and a score of 15 and above indicates at least moderately severe depression.
34

)01≥9QHP(
desserpeD
noitcarF
001
08
06
04
02
0
Panel A: Fraction depressed over time in HAP
xxx
Control
Treatment
0 3 6 12 24 36 48 60 Months
Months after Enrollment
)01≥9QHP(
desserpeD
noitcarF
001
08
06
04
02
0
Panel B: Fraction depressed over time in THPP
xxx
Control
Treatment
0 3 6 12 24 36 48 60 Months
Months after Enrollment
Figure 3: Effects on depression over time
Notes: Thisfigureshowstheshareofpeoplewhoaredepressed(PHQ-9≥10)inthetreatmentandcontrolgroupsatbaselineandatthree
points in time during the study’s follow-up. The HAP trial is shown in Panel A, and the THPP trial is shown in Panel B.
• Each graph shows four data points for the respective treatment and control groups: (i) at baseline and during follow-up visits; (ii)
3 months after the intervention; (iii) 12 months (HAP) or 6 months (THPP) after the intervention; and (iv) 60 months (HAP) or
48 months (THPP) after the intervention.
• 90%ConfidenceintervalsaroundthetreatmentgroupmeansareusingstandarderrorsofregressionsofPHQ-9depressionlevelson
treatment.
• Depression prevalence at baseline is 100%, since only individuals with PHQ-9≥10 were eligible to be included in each study.
35

Notes: Thisfigureshowscontrolandtreatmentgroups’meanbeliefsabouttreatmenteffectsondepressionateachtimehorizon,alongsideestimatedtrueeffects. PanelAshowsthe
resultsofHAPparticipantpredictionsoftheHAPintervention’seffectsonremission,andPanelBshowsthesamepredictionsamongTHPPrespondentsfortheTHPPintervention.
Remission is defined as having a PHQ-9 score below 10.
• Point estimates and 90% confidence intervals for the true effects use the double machine learning approach of Chernozhukov et al. (2016).
• 90% confidence intervals on average beliefs are calculated from conventional standard errors of the mean.
• Each participant is asked, for each time horizon and for the control group and treatment group separately, out of 10 randomly selected members of that group, how many
wouldhavehadtheirdepression“reducedtohealthylevels.” Thedifferencebetweenthesebeliefsistheirimpliedbeliefaboutthetreatmenteffectonremissionfromdepression.
Participants were incentivized for accuracy.
Figure 4: Beliefs about treatment effects
36

Panel A. Overconfidence over the course of the experiment
Control group
Treatment group (90% CI)
ecnedifnocrevO
2.
51.
1.
50.
0
Initial Adjust 1 2 3 4 5
Prior Posterior after signal
Panel B. Belief updating parameters
Updating coefficients Updating outcomes
Bayesian Benchmark
1
8.
6.
4.
2.
0
2.-
Positive Negative Asymmetry Conservatism
signal (β ) signal (β ) (β - β) (β)
H L H L
Control Treatment 90% CI
Figure 5: Effects of psychotherapy on overconfidence and belief updating
Notes: Thisfigureshowstheimpactofthetreatmentsonbeliefupdating,pooledacrossthetwoRCTs(split-sampleestimatesarereported
in Table 4). Belief updating is studied in a task where individuals report their estimated probability that they are in the top half of
performance on a work task, and then update their beliefs in response to informative but noisy signals (see Section 6).
• Panel A reports individuals’ overconfidence over the course of the experiment, defined as the difference between their reported
probability of being in the top half and a full-information benchmark probability. The full-information benchmark is calculated
for each individual as their true probability of being in the top half of a randomly selected group of 10 given their own score, any
signals they have received up to that point, and the empirical distribution of scores. 90% confidence intervals were computed using
standard errors from DML-estimated regression coefficients.
• Panel Breportsthecoefficientsfrombeliefupdatingregressions(equation(3)). β andβ measureresponsivenesstopositiveand
H L
negative signals, respectively. A Bayesian is characterized by β = β = 1. β −β is the difference between responsiveness to
H L H L
positive and negative signals, and equals 0 for a Bayesian. β¯measures responsiveness forcing the response to positive and negative
signalstobeidentical,whichequals1foraBayesianupdater. 90%confidenceintervalsareshownforthedifferencebetweencontrol
and treatment groups. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
37

Response to good news (β ) Response to bad news (β ) Asymmetry (β −β )
H L H L
elpmaS
lluF.A
sretadpU−reveN
porD.B
setadpU
roirP=roiretsoP
porD.C
setadpU
noitceriD
gnorW
porD.D
D
ro
C
yna
htiw
stnapicitraP
porD.E
A B C D E A B C D E
tneiciffeoc
gnitadpu
feileB
52.1
1
57.
5.
52.
0
52.−
Control group Treatment group 90% Confidence interval
Figure 6: Belief updating coefficients using different sub-samples
Notes: ThisfiguresummarizesrobustnessoftreatmenteffectsonthebeliefupdatingoutcomesfromPanelBofFigure5,usingdifferentsubsamples. Theestimatedcoefficients
for the control group are shown in light blue and for the treatment group in dark blue. The full regression estimates are shown in Table A.7.
• Coefficients come from belief updating regressions (equation (3)). β and β measure responsiveness to positive and negative signals, respectively. A Bayesian is
H L
characterized by β = β = 1. β −β is the difference between responsiveness to positive and negative signals, and equals 0 for a Bayesian. 90% confidence
H L H L
intervalsareshownforthedifferencebetweencontrolandtreatmentgroups. Standarderrorsareclusteredattheindividuallevelastheseregressionsincludemultiple
observations for each individual.
• Sample A utilizes the primary analysis sample as shown in Figure 5 Panel B (full sample except observations with degenerate beliefs, since the likelihood ratios are
not defined in this case). Sample B drops individuals who never update their beliefs. Sample C drops individual observations where the participant did not update
(posterior equals prior). Sample D drops observations with wrong-signed updates (negative updates following good news or positive updates following bad news).
Sample E drops individuals who ever do not update, update in the wrong direction, or report a degenerate belief (0 or 1).
38

Altruism
Anderson Index
Incentivized dictator game
Willing to do good
Patience
Anderson index
Incentivized saving a note task
Give up today for future
Complete task early
Discounting now vs 12mo.
Discounting 12 vs 24mo.
Present bias
Risk Tolerance
Anderson index
Incentivized risk tolerance task
Incentivized loss tolerance task
Choose uncertainty
−.2 0 .2 .4
Treatment effects (SDs)
Figure 7: Standardized treatment effects on altruism, patience, and risk tolerance
Notes: This figure summarises effects of treatment on preference outcomes in the full sample, plus indices of the various sub-components.
Split-sample estimates presented in Table 5.
• Alloutcomesarestandardizedtomeanzero,standarddeviationoneinthecontrolgroup. Treatmenteffectsareestimatedusingthe
double machine learning approach of Chernozhukov et al. (2016). Error bars show 90% confidence intervals.
• The first panel reports measures of altruism. “Dictator game” is the amount of money out of Rs. 50 that the participant chose to
send to another participant instead of keeping for themselves. “Willing to do good without expecting return” is a self-evaluation
measure of altruism.
• The second panel reports measures of patience. “Saving a Note Task” is a dummy equal to one if the participant saved a Rs. 100
banknote for one week, earning a Rs. 30 return. “Willing to give up today for future” and “Willing to complete task early” are
self-evaluation measures of patience. Discounting and present bias parameters are computed from choices over hypothetical sooner
vs.latermonetaryamounts. TheAndersonindexisconstructedexcludingthepresentbiasparameter,whichisatransformationof
two other components.
• Thefinalpanelreportsmeasuresofrisktolerance. “Risktolerance” and“Losstolerance” arecomputedfromparticipant’sswitching
pointsinincentivizedrisk/losslotterychoicetasks,withpositivenumberscorrespondingtohigherrisktoleranceandlosstolerance.
“Willing to choose uncertain outcomes” is a self-evaluation measure of risk tolerance.
39

Panel A. Treatment effects on main outcomes
PHQ9 Score
Initial Overconfidence
Patience index
Risk tolerance index
Altruism index
Consumption
Employment
-.2 0 .2
Pooled Treatment Effect (SDs)
Prediction IQR Actual pooled estimate HAP estimate
Panel B. Belief updating ratios in control and treatment groups
Control
Treatment
-.5 0 .5 1 1.5 2
Belief updating ratio
Prediction IQR Actual pooled estimate HAP estimate
Figure 8: Survey of Experts
Notes: This figure shows the results of the survey of experts (who were only ask to forecast the results of the HAP trial), and how their
predictions compare to the actual treatment effects found in the study.
• Panel A shows inter-quartile ranges (in navy blue), i.e. the 25th percentile, median, and 75th percentile of experts’ predictions of
treatment effects for the main outcomes of the study., and dots report the actual treatment effect found in the study: yellow dots
represent the pooled estimates and red dots represent estimates for HAP only. All estimates are used DML and are reported in
standard deviation units.
• Panel Bshowsexperts’predictionoftheratioofresponsivenesstonegativeandpositivesignals, βL,inthecontrolandtreatment
βH
groups respectively. Experts were asked for their predictions on a scale that ranged between 0.25 and 4.0. Since the point estimate
for β was close to 0 and negative, the true point estimates are also close to 0 and negative, and thus were outside the range of
L
what the survey allowed experts to report.
40

Table 1: Attrition and balance
Baseline (N=773) Follow-up (N=589)
Control mean ∆ Treatment Control mean ∆ Treatment
(S.D.) (S.E.) (S.D.) (S.E.)
Completed this stage 1.00 0.00 0.78 -0.05
( 0.42) ( 0.03)
Baseline PHQ-9 score 16.15 0.24 16.14 0.36
( 3.77) ( 0.21) ( 3.66) ( 0.24)
Duration of depression at baseline (weeks) 30.87 1.57 33.25 -0.09
( 95.34) ( 6.58) ( 105.36) ( 8.42)
Years between baseline and follow-up - - 4.57 0.01
( 0.73) ( 0.05)
Number of children - - 2.16 -0.01
( 1.16) ( 0.11)
Female 0.85 -0.00 0.88 -0.01
( 0.35) ( 0.02) ( 0.33) ( 0.03)
Age 36.37 -0.22 37.64 0.21
( 12.99) ( 0.72) ( 12.83) ( 0.82)
Married 0.80 -0.01 0.81 -0.01
( 0.40) ( 0.03) ( 0.39) ( 0.03)
Years of education 6.51 -0.37 6.24 -0.48
( 4.52) ( 0.34) ( 4.38) ( 0.36)
Hindu 0.78 0.01 0.79 0.03
( 0.41) ( 0.03) ( 0.41) ( 0.03)
Expected treatment efficacy 0.76 0.00 0.75 -0.02
( 0.43) ( 0.03) ( 0.43) ( 0.04)
Homemaker 0.57 0.02 0.59 -0.00
( 0.50) ( 0.03) ( 0.49) ( 0.04)
Unemployed 0.09 0.02 0.07 0.04
( 0.28) ( 0.02) ( 0.25) ( 0.02)
Employed 0.34 -0.04 0.34 -0.04
( 0.47) ( 0.03) ( 0.47) ( 0.04)
F-test 0.49 0.72
p-value 0.91 0.73
Notes: ThistablepresentscharacteristicsoftheRCTsamples,pooledacrossbothtrials. Thecharacteristicssplitbytrialarepresented
in Appendix Table A.1.
•The first two columns present baseline mean characteristics in the control group (standard deviations in parentheses) and
the difference between mean characteristics in the treatment and control groups (standard errors in parentheses) among all
participants who took part in one of the two trials.
•The last two columns present the same characteristics and differences among only those individuals who also appear in the
follow-upsurvey. F-testsfromaregressionofthetreatmentdummyonthesecharacteristicsineachsamplearepresentedatthe
bottom of the table.
•‘Baseline PHQ-9 score’ is a standard diagnostic test for depression; it ranges from 0 to 27, with a score greater than or equal to
10 indicating at least moderate depression symptoms. The baseline score reported is the score at enrollment in the initial trial
(before the interventions).
•‘Female’ takes the value 1 for female participants and 0 for male participants. ‘Expected treatment efficacy’ takes the value 1
if the participant expected the treatment to be at least ‘somewhat useful’, and 0 if the patient expected the treatment to be ‘a
littleuseful’orless. ‘Homemaker’takesthevalueof1ifparticipantdoesnotworkforpayoutsidethehomeandisnotsearching
for other work currently.
41

Table 2: Impacts of the treatments on depression
Full Sample HAP THPP HAP - THPP
Control mean Treatment Effect Control mean Treatment Effect Control mean Treatment Effect ∆ T.E.
(S.D.) (S.E.) (S.D.) (S.E.) (S.D.) (S.E.) [p-value]
Panel A: OLS without controls
PHQ-9 Score 7.97 −0.97** 9.10 −1.43** 5.68 −0.04 −1.40
(5.86) (0.48) (5.97) (0.61) (4.92) (0.78) [0.18]
PHQ-9<5 0.33 0.12*** 0.25 0.15*** 0.50 0.07 0.07
(0.47) (0.04) (0.43) (0.05) (0.50) (0.07) [0.38]
PHQ-9<10 0.63 0.08** 0.55 0.12** 0.78 0.00 0.12
(0.48) (0.04) (0.50) (0.05) (0.41) (0.06) [0.15]
Mood Score 6.49 0.38** 6.19 0.38 7.10 0.40 −0.02
(2.35) (0.19) (2.40) (0.24) (2.14) (0.32) [0.96]
Panel B: DML
PHQ-9 Score 7.97 −0.85* 9.10 −1.37** 5.68 0.15 −1.52
(5.86) (0.47) (5.97) (0.59) (4.92) (0.77) [0.13]
PHQ-9<5 0.33 0.11*** 0.25 0.13*** 0.50 0.07 0.06
(0.47) (0.04) (0.43) (0.05) (0.50) (0.07) [0.50]
PHQ-9<10 0.63 0.08** 0.55 0.13*** 0.78 −0.01 0.14*
(0.48) (0.04) (0.50) (0.05) (0.41) (0.06) [0.08]
Mood Score 6.49 0.39** 6.19 0.43* 7.10 0.34 0.08
(2.35) (0.19) (2.40) (0.24) (2.14) (0.31) [0.84]
N 589 395 194
Notes: This table presents estimates of the effects of the treatments on depression as measured in the follow-up study, several years after the initial interventions.
•Thefirsttwocolumnsshowtheimpactsforthefullsample,i.e.,poolingthetwotrials. Thefollowingcolumnsshowtheimpactsforthetwotrialsseparately. Oddcolumns
report control-group means, along with standard deviations in parentheses. Even columns report treatment effects along with standard errors in parentheses. The last
column reports the difference in treatment effects across the two trials, with the p-value of a test for equal treatment effects across the two trials in square brackets.
•Panel A shows estimates from OLS regressions without control variables (apart from a dummy variable for the THPP trial, in column 2). Panel B reports coefficients
estimated using the double machine learning approach of Chernozhukov et al. (2016), using all control variables available in the baseline data.
•The PHQ-9 score is a standard diagnostic test of depression measured on a scale from 0 to 27. A score of 10 or higher indicates at least moderate depression symptoms,
and a score of 5 or higher indicates at least mild depression symptoms. The Mood Score is a self-reported measure of happiness on a scale from 1 to 10, averaged across
three days.
•The bottom row shows the sample sizes for PHQ-9 Score related variables. Sample sizes for the Mood Score are 578 (full sample), 387 (HAP), and 191 (THPP),
respectively.
42

Table 3: Impacts on beliefs about treatment effects
Full Sample HAP THPP
Control Mean Treatment Effect Control Mean Treatment Effect Control Mean Treatment Effect
S.E. S.E. S.E. S.E. S.E. S.E.
Panel A: Remission after 3 months
True Effect (N=711) 0.2*** 0.25*** 0.1**
(0.03) (0.04) (0.05)
Participant Beliefs (N=450) 0.12 0.0 0.1 -0.01 0.13 0.01
(0.01) (0.02) (0.02) (0.03) (0.02) (0.03)
p-value (control group=true effect) [0.01] [<0.01] [0.52]
p-value (treatment group=true effect) [0.02] [<0.01] [0.39]
Panel B: Remission after 6 months/1 year
True Effect (N=699) 0.11*** 0.16*** 0.03
(0.03) (0.05) (0.04)
Participant Beliefs (N=450) 0.06 0.1*** 0.02 0.11*** 0.1 0.09***
(0.01) (0.02) (0.02) (0.03) (0.02) (0.03)
p-value (control group=true effect) [0.11] [0.01] [0.11]
p-value (treatment group=true effect) [0.16] [0.61] [<0.01]
Panel C: Remission after 4/5 years
True Effect (N=589) 0.08** 0.13** -0.01
(0.04) (0.05) (0.06)
Participant Beliefs (N=450) 0.07 0.08*** 0.07 0.07** 0.08 0.09**
(0.01) (0.02) (0.02) (0.03) (0.02) (0.04)
p-value (control group=true effect) [0.8] [0.23] [0.05]
p-value (treatment group=true effect) [0.04] [0.95] [<0.01]
Notes: This table reports estimates of participants’ beliefs of the treatment effects on depression. We report estimated treatment effects on true remission from depression
(PHQ-9 < 10), and participants’ beliefs of these treatment effects. Estimation uses the double machine learning approach of Chernozhukov et al. (2016).
•Participants are asked, separately for the treatment group and the control group, out of 10 randomly selected individuals, how many would have had their depression
“reduced to healthy levels.” We use their answers to construct their implied belief about the treatment effect on remission from depression. HAP participants are asked
about the effects of HAP; THPP participants are asked about the effects of THPP.
•For each time horizon, we report (i) true (estimated) treatment effects; (ii) the control group’s average beliefs of these treatment effects; and (iii) the treatment effect
on these beliefs, i.e. the difference between treatment and control group’s beliefs of treatment effects; and (iv) p-values corresponding to tests of whether mean beliefs of
treatment and control participants, respectively, equal the “true” estimated effect.
•Appendix Table A.3 expands this table by presenting the raw beliefs about outcomes in the control and treatment groups.
43

Table 4: Impacts on confidence and belief updating
Full Sample HAP THPP
Controlmean TreatmentEffect Controlmean TreatmentEffect Controlmean TreatmentEffect
(S.E.) (S.E.) (S.E.) (S.E.) (S.E.) (S.E.)
[p-values]{q-values} [p-values]{q-values} [p-values]{q-values}
Panel A. Overconfidence
InitialOverconfidence 0.13 -0.03 0.22 -0.02 -0.04 -0.04
(0.02) (0.03) (0.03) (0.04) (0.04) (0.05)
[0.42]{0.43} [0.64]{0.64} [0.50]{0.50}
FinalOverconfidence 0.16 -0.08** 0.23 -0.07* 0.02 -0.09
(0.02) (0.03) (0.03) (0.04) (0.04) (0.06)
[0.02]{0.05} [0.11]{0.22} [0.13]{0.25}
N 576 385 191
Panel B. Belief-updating coefficients
ResponsetoGoodNews(β ) 0.73 -0.21** 0.73 -0.22* 0.67 -0.20
H
(0.08) (0.10) (0.10) (0.13) (0.10) (0.14)
[0.03]{0.07} [0.09]{0.18} [0.15]{0.31}
ResponsetoBadNews(β ) -0.09 0.06 -0.13 0.03 -0.03 0.11
L
(0.06) (0.09) (0.08) (0.11) (0.07) (0.12)
[0.51]{0.51} [0.78]{0.78} [0.35]{0.35}
Panel C. Asymmetry and conservatism
Asymmetry(β −β ) 0.82 -0.27* 0.85 -0.25 0.69 -0.32 H L
(0.12) (0.15) (0.15) (0.19) (0.14) (0.21)
[0.08]{0.16} [0.20]{0.29} [0.12]{0.25}
Conservatism(β¯) 0.29 -0.06 0.27 -0.07 0.29 -0.02
(0.04) (0.05) (0.05) (0.07) (0.06) (0.08)
[0.30]{0.40} [0.29]{0.29} [0.80]{0.80}
N 2620 1715 905
Notes: This table reports treatment effects on self-confidence and belief updating. Table A.5 presents more details on the construction of each outcome.
•Panel A uses the double machine learning approach of Chernozhukov et al. (2016). Panels B and C use the belief-updating regression specification (3). “Control mean”
and “Treatment Effect” columns report standard errors in parentheses.
•Starsrefertounadjustedtwo-sidedp-valuesatthresholds0.1and0.05respectively. Unadjustedp-valuesarereportedinsquarebracketsandFalseDiscoveryRate-adjusted
q-values in curly brackets. Multiple testing adjustments correct across outcomes within each panel separately.
•PanelAreportseffectsonoverconfidence. ‘InitialOverconfidence’equalstheparticipant’sinitialbeliefabouttheirprobabilityofbeingintheupperhalfofperformancein
theirgroupoftenpeople,minusthefull-informationbenchmark,computedassuminggroupsdrawnfromthepopulationperformancedistribution. ‘FinalOverconfidence’
equals the participant’s belief after observing five signals, minus the Bayesian posterior given the full-information benchmark and the observed signals.
•Panel B reports belief updating coefficients, which measure the change in the posterior likelihood ratio in response to signals, relative to the Bayesian benchmark. β
H
measures the response to good news, and β the response to bad news. Bayesian updating implies β =1, and β =1.
L H L
•Panel Creportstransformationsofthebeliefupdatingcoefficients. ‘Asymmetry’measuresthedifferencebetweentheresponsetogoodandbadnews. Bayesianupdating
implies β −β = 0. ‘Conservatism’ measures the average responsiveness to news, forcing the coefficients on good and bad news to be identical. Bayesian updating
H L
implies β¯=1.
44

Table 5: Patience, risk tolerance, and altruism
FullSample HAP THPP
Controlmean TreatmentEffect Controlmean TreatmentEffect Controlmean TreatmentEffect
(S.D.) (S.E.) (S.D.) (S.E.) (S.D.) (S.E.)
[p-values]{q-values} [p-values]{q-values} [p-values]{q-values}
PanelA:Altruism
Andersonindex 0.00 0.21** 0.00 0.25** 0.00 0.16
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.14)
[0.01]{0.04} [0.02]{0.05} [0.27]{0.40}
Amountgivenawayindictatorgame 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.13 0.00 0.05
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.14)
[0.25]{0.69} [0.20]{0.72} [0.72]{0.93}
Willingtodogoodwithoutexpectingreturn 0.00 0.19** 0.00 0.20* 0.00 0.19
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.13)
N 562 379 183
PanelB:Patience
Andersonindex 0.00 0.18** 0.00 0.17* 0.00 0.27*
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.15)
[0.03]{0.05} [0.08]{0.12} [0.09]{0.27}
Notesavedinsavinganotetask 0.00 0.06 0.00 -0.05 0.00 0.26*
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.11) (1.00) (0.14)
[0.52]{0.69} [0.66]{0.72} [0.08]{0.30}
Willingtogiveuptodayforfuture 0.00 0.24*** 0.00 0.33*** 0.00 0.07
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.14)
Willingtocompletetaskearly(notdelay) 0.00 0.08 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.04
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.15)
Discountingδaweight: todayvs12months 0.00 0.07 0.00 0.09 0.00 0.02
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.15)
Discountingδbweight: 12monthsvs24months 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.05
(1.00) (0.09) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.16)
Presentbiasβ: δa/δb 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.07
(1.00) (0.09) (1.00) (0.11) (1.00) (0.17)
N 562 379 183
PanelC:Risktolerance
Andersonindex 0.00 0.05 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.11
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.14)
[0.52]{0.52} [0.78]{0.79} [0.45]{0.45}
Risktolerance 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.08 0.00 0.01
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.14)
[0.48]{0.69} [0.42]{0.72} [0.93]{0.93}
Losstolerance 0.00 0.01 0.00 -0.04 0.00 0.11
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.14)
[0.90]{0.90} [0.72]{0.72} [0.46]{0.92}
Willingtochooseuncertainoutcomes 0.00 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.13
(1.00) (0.09) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.15)
N 562 379 183
Notes: Thistablereportstreatmenteffectsonpreferencemeasures. SeeTableA.5formoredetailontheconstructionofeachoutcome.
•All outcomes are standardized to mean zero, standard deviation 1 in the control group. All estimates use the double machine
learningapproachofChernozhukovetal.(2016). “Controlmean” columnsreportstandarddeviationsinparentheses. “Treatment
Effect” columns report standard errors in parentheses.
•Stars refer to unadjusted two-sided p-values at thresholds 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively. Unadjusted p-values are reported in
square brackets and False Discovery Rate-adjusted q-values in curly brackets. Multiple testing corrections correct across two
distinct sets of outcomes. First, the three index outcomes: patience, risk tolerance, and altruism. Second, the set of revealed-
preference outcomes (which are sub-components of the index measures) “Saving a Note,” “Risk Aversion,” “Loss Aversion,”
“DictatorGame,” sincethesearetheprimaryoutcomesspecifiedinourpre-analysisplan. Eachpanelreportsaninversecovariance
weighted index measure over the sub-components reported in that panel (Anderson, 2008).
•PanelAreportsmeasuresofaltruism. “Dictatorgame” iscomputedfromtheamountofmoneyoutofRs.50thattheparticipant
chose to send to another participant instead of keeping for themselves. “Willing to do good without expecting return” is a self-
evaluation measure of altruism.
•Panel B reports measures of patience. “Note saved in saving a Note Task” records whether the participant saved a Rs. 100
banknoteforoneweek,earningaRs.30return. “Willingtogiveuptodayforfuture” and“Willingtocompletetaskearly” areself-
evaluation measures of patience. Discounting and present bias parameters are computed from choices over hypothetical sooner
vs.latermonetaryamounts. TheAndersonindexisconstructedexcludingthepresentbiasparameter,whichisatransformation
of two other components.
•Panel Creportsmeasuresofrisktolerance. “Risktolerance” and“Losstolerance” arebasedontheparticipant’sswitchingpoint
inincentivizedrisk/losslotterychoicetasks,alignedsothatpositivenumberscorrespondtohigherrisktoleranceandhigherloss
tolerance. “Willing to choose uncertain outcomes” is a self-evaluation measure of risk tolerance.
45

Table 6: Impacts on employment, productivity, and expenditures
FullSample HAP THPP
Controlmean TreatmentEffect Controlmean TreatmentEffect Controlmean TreatmentEffect
(S.D.) (S.E.) (S.D.) (S.E.) (S.D.) (S.E.)
PanelA:Survey-basedmeasuresoflaborsupplyandemployment
Engagedinworkinthelastweek 0.25 -0.01 0.27 -0.01 0.21 -0.03
(0.43) (0.03) (0.44) (0.04) (0.41) (0.06)
Workhoursinthelastweek 5.14 0.67 6.31 -0.35 2.76 2.03
(13.91) (1.20) (15.71) (1.61) (8.80) (1.68)
Earningsinthepastmonth(PPP) 83.43 3.78 98.09 -6.96 53.63 27.73
(230.13) (16.50) (263.82) (21.80) (134.86) (22.90)
Availabletotakeonanemploymentopportunity 0.82 0.04 0.78 0.07* 0.91 0.01
(0.39) (0.03) (0.42) (0.04) (0.29) (0.05)
Jobsearchhoursperweek(amongunemployed) 0.78 0.14 0.73 0.32 0.85 -0.18
(2.77) (0.27) (2.63) (0.36) (3.02) (0.39)
N 557 375 182
PanelB:Revealed-preferencemeasuresoflaborsupplyandproductivity
Reservationwage(PPPtomake1000bracelets) 64.17 3.14 65.26 5.57 62.01 -3.09
(46.21) (3.70) (47.55) (4.57) (43.57) (6.23)
Appliedforability-basedcontract 0.63 0.01 0.62 0.02 0.64 0.01
(0.48) (0.04) (0.49) (0.05) (0.48) (0.07)
Braceletsmadeintenminutes 5.04 -0.01 4.68 -0.08 5.76 0.10
(1.52) (0.11) (1.42) (0.13) (1.44) (0.19)
N 576 385 191
PanelC:Expenditures
Totalmonthlyexpenditure(PPP) 1013.27 -17.21 977.41 43.52 1086.50 -119.20
(819.22) (69.40) (866.24) (94.80) (712.35) (86.10)
Food 325.39 -17.54 288.20 -7.57 401.32 -37.69
(202.44) (15.80) (186.97) (18.30) (212.40) (29.70)
Durablegoods 153.34 24.52 172.07 49.59 115.08 -21.33
(364.84) (36.20) (418.48) (52.80) (214.60) (26.20)
Medical 168.16 -9.90 165.94 12.59 172.69 -46.30
(320.25) (33.50) (328.47) (45.70) (304.43) (35.80)
Other 366.39 -11.41 351.20 -9.39 397.42 -13.86
(303.96) (25.60) (298.44) (32.70) (314.25) (40.70)
N 558 376 182
PanelD:Indicesofotheroutcomes
Femaleempowerment 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.19 0.00 -0.13
(1.00) (0.09) (1.00) (0.13) (1.00) (0.14)
Intimatepartnerviolence(IPV) 0.00 -0.12 0.00 -0.13 0.00 -0.11
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.12) (1.00) (0.10)
Sleep 0.00 0.20** 0.00 0.20* 0.00 0.25*
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.15)
Loneliness 0.00 -0.08 0.00 -0.13 -0.00 -0.03
(1.00) (0.09) (1.00) (0.11) (1.00) (0.15)
Locusofcontrol 0.00 0.04 0.00 -0.02 0.00 0.19
(1.00) (0.08) (1.00) (0.10) (1.00) (0.14)
N 566 378 188
Notes: Thistablereportstreatmenteffectsonlabor-marketoutcomes(PanelsAandB),householdconsumption(PanelC),andindices
of other outcomes. All estimates use the double machine learning approach of Chernozhukov et al. (2016).
•Panel Ashowssurveymeasuresoflabormarketoutcomes. ‘Engagedinworkinthelastweek’countsthoseunemployeddueto
disability(N=29)asnotworking. ‘Workhoursinthelastweek’askedofeveryone,andcountsthoseunemployedas0. ‘Earnings
inthepastmonth’askedofeveryone,thosewhoareunemployedbutwereemployedinthelastthreemonthshavetheirmonthly
earnings averaged over the three months. ‘Available to take employment opportunity’ is the proportion of individuals available
to take up wage paying employment if an opportunity they were interested in were to arise in the next 4 months. ‘Job search
hours per week’ are conditional on unemployment, with sample sizes of N=393 (pooled sample), N=250 (HAP), and N=143
(THPP).
•Panel B shows revealed-preference measures of work-related outcomes: (i) participant’s reservation wage for the employment
contractthatisofferedtoeveryoneregardlessofperformance(pricetomake1000braceletsonowntime);(ii)whetheraparticipant
chosetoapplyforthe“ability-based” employmentcontract(pre-specifiedasourprimarylabormarketoutcome). (iii)numberof
bracelets made in 10 minutes, a measure of productivity;
•Panel C shows survey measures of household expenditures. Monthly consumption measurement is assessed using conversion
to USD at purchasing power parity, at a rate of 21.107 rupees/dollar, from the OECD 2019 USD/IND PPP Index. Medical
expenditureincludesbothinpatientandoutpatientmedicalexpenses. Otherconsumptioniscalculatedasresidualtotalconsump-
tion after subtracting food, medical expenditure, and durable goods, and includes items like phone costs, fuel, power, tuition,
transportation, ceremonies, toiletries, and taxes.
•Panel Dshowsindicesofotheroutcomes,whichareshowninmoredetailintheappendix: FemaleEmpowerment(TableA.11);
Intimate Partner Violence (Table A.12); and Sleep, Loneliness, and Locus of Control (Table A.13).
46

A Appendix A: Supplementary Figures and Tables
Figure A.1: Trial Flow Diagram - HAP
Assessed for baseline eligibility (n= 146,661)
Ineligible (n= 112,355)
Eligible for screening (n= 34,306)
Refused screen (n= 2,418)
Screened with PHQ-9 (n= 31,888)
Screen negative (n= 31,040)
Other ineligible comorbidities, e.g. harmful drinking (n= 63)
Screen positive (n= 785)
PHQ-9>14 for HAP
Declined to participate or later withdrew
consent (n= 292)
Consented and randomized to baseline intervention (n= 493)
Assigned treatment group (n= 245) Assigned control group (n= 248)
First wave follow-up – 3mo. (n= 230) First wave follow-up – 3mo. (n= 236)
Second wave follow-up (n= 218) Second wave follow-up (n= 229)
1 year for HAP 1 year for HAP
Eligible for long-term follow-up (n= 245) Eligible for long-term follow-up (n= 248)
Died (n= 6) Died (n= 11)
Migrated (n= 7) Migrated (n= 4)
Not reached (n= 17) Not reached (n= 19)
Reached and declined (n= 24) Reached and declined (n= 10)
Interviewed in long-term follow-up (n= 191) Interviewed in long-term follow-up (n= 204)
5 years for HAP 5 years for HAP
Notes: This table displays the sample sizes and the trial flow chart for the HAP baseline as well as the follow-up studies. Full trial
flow charts for the first waves are available in Patel et al. (2017); Weobong et al. (2017).
47

Figure A.2: Trial Flow Diagram - THPP
Assessed for baseline eligibility (n= 118,260)
Ineligible (n= 111,851)
Eligible for screening (n= 6,409)
Refused screen (n= 40)
Screened with PHQ-9 (n= 6,369)
Screen Negative (n= 6,036)
Screen positive (n= 333)
PHQ-9>9 for THPP
Declined to participate or later withdrew
consent (n= 53)
Consented and randomized to baseline intervention (n= 280)
Assigned treatment group (n= 140) Assigned control group (n= 140)
First wave follow-up – 3mo. (n= 123) First wave follow-up – 3mo. (n= 122)
Second wave follow-up (n= 122) Second wave follow-up (n= 130)
6 months for THPP 6 months for THPP
Eligible for long-term follow-up (n= 140) Eligible for long-term follow-up (n= 140)
Died (n= 1) Died (n= 1)
Migrated (n= 18) Migrated (n= 7)
Not reached (n= 20) Not reached (n= 20)
Reached and declined (n= 8) Reached and declined (n= 11)
Interviewed in long-term follow-up (n= 93) Interviewed in long-term follow-up (n= 101)
4 years for THPP 4 years for THPP
Notes: This table displays the sample sizes and the trial flow chart for the THPP baseline as well as the follow-up studies. Full trial
flow charts for the first waves are available in Fuhr et al. (2019).
48