AER: Insights 2025, 7(1): 39–55
https://doi.org/10.1257/aeri.20230431
Money (Not) to Burn: Payments for Ecosystem Services
to Reduce Crop Residue Burning†
By B. Kelsey Jack, Seema Jayachandran,
Namrata Kala, and Rohini Pande*
We test whether payments for ecosystem services PES can curb the
( )
highly polluting practice of crop residue burning in India. Standard
PES contracts pay participants after verification that they met a
proenvironment condition clearing fields without burning . We
( )
randomize paying a portion of the money up front and uncondition-
ally to address liquidity constraints and farmer distrust, which may
undermine the standard contract’s effectiveness. Incorporating par-
tial up-front payment into the contract increases compliance by 10
percentage points, which is corroborated by satellite-based burning
measurements. The cost per life saved is $3,600–$5,400. The stan-
dard PES contract has no effect on burning. JEL D86, O13, Q12,
(
Q15, Q18, Q53, Q58
)
Poor air quality is a leading preventable cause of mortality and illness globally
Fuller et al. 2022 . In North India, air pollution reduces life expectancy by six to nine
( )
years for the region’s half a billion residents, representing one of the world’s larg-
est pollution-related health burdens Ghude et al. 2016; Lee and Greenstone 2021 .
( )
Agricultural fires are a major source of this pollution. Every winter, farmers burn
rice stalk residue to clear their fields after harvest. Smoke blankets the region and
( )
drifts downwind to New Delhi, accounting for 30–40 percent of the city’s winter air
pollution Bikkina et al. 2019; Govardhan et al. 2023 .1
( )
Crop residue burning is a classic example of an environmental externality, and
the Indian government has responded with a command-and-control approach:
* Jack: Department of Economics, UC Santa Barbara email: kelseyjack@ucsb.edu; Jayachandran:
( )
Department of Economics, Princeton University email: jayachandran@princeton.edu; Kala: MIT Sloan School
( )
of Management email: kala@mit.edu; Pande: Department of Economics, Yale University email: rohini.pande@
( ) (
yale.edu. Jesse Shapiro was the coeditor for this article. We thank Patrick Behrer, Xavier Gine, Michael Greenstone,
)
Rema Hanna, Chris Knittel, Michael Kremer, Jeff Pagel, Imran Rasul, Nick Ryan, and many seminar audiences
for helpful comments. We also thank Marshall Burke, Ben Moscona, and especially Kendra Walker for guidance
and support with the remote sensing data; Juliana Sanchez Ariza, Nils Enevoldsen, Valentina Goetz, Rohit James
Joseph, Sahiba Lal, Aditya Madhusudan, and Ayushi Srivastava for excellent research assistance; and J-PAL South
Asia for field support. We thank J-PAL and CEGA’s Agricultural Technology Adoption Initiative ATAI grant
( )(
354847, J-PAL South Asia at IFMR’s Cash Transfers for Child Health Initiative CaTCH, Jody and John Arnhold,
) ( )
and the Yale Economic Growth Center for funding. This RCT was registered in the AEA Registry under number
AEARCTR-0004508 Jack et al. 2021. The data and code for the study are available through the AEA Data and
( )
Code Repository Jack et al. 2025.
† Go to https: ( //doi.org/10.125 ) 7/aeri.20230431 to visit the article page for additional materials and author
disclosure statements.
1 Crop residue bu ( rn ) ing is also an important pollution source in China Chen et al. 2017, Southeast Asia Oanh
( ) (
et al. 2018, and Africa Cassou 2018.
) ( )
39

40 AER: INSIGHTS MARCH 2025
since 2015, burning residue has been banned and punishable by fines. However,
the externality’s interjurisdictional nature and a powerful farmer lobby have under-
mined political incentives to enforce the ban Dipoppa and Gulzar 2022 . The gov-
( )
ernment also introduced subsidies for farm equipment that removes residue without
burning. However, subsidy levels are insufficient to cover the full cost of equipment
use and are restricted to certain equipment. With the existing policy mix, crop resi-
due burning remains widespread Aryal et al. 2023 .
( )
In this paper, we test whether payments for ecosystem services PES contracts,
( )
which condition cash transfers on avoiding an environmentally harmful behavior,
can solve this problem. Like fines and subsidies for alternatives, compensating
farmers for not burning residue increases their private cost of burning. PES, unlike
fines, does not make potential polluters worse off. Unlike equipment subsidies, PES
is agnostic about how the participant achieves the desired outcome; it targets the
outcome rather than specific inputs. These features make PES a potentially attrac-
tive solution in settings where bans are poorly enforced, policymakers worry about
impoverishing small landowners, and farmers’ preferred alternatives are not well
understood.
Contextual and institutional features common in lower-income countries moti-
vate PES but can also restrict its efficacy and that of conditional cash transfers more
generally. Before receiving payment, PES participants must undertake the costly
action required under the contract. They might not comply if they doubt the payment
will be made or if they lack the cash needed to change behavior e.g., to rent farm
(
equipment to avoid burning . PES contracts that offer partial up-front payment may
)
ease these constraints. An up-front payment sends a costly signal, increasing trust
that the conditional payment will occur. It also provides liquidity to pay for the costs
to comply.
We conducted a randomized controlled trial in 171 Punjabi villages during the
2019 rice growing season to assess the efficacy of standard PES versus PES with a
partial up-front payment. Villages were randomized into three groups: no contracts
control , contracts with payment conditional on verification that the farmer did not
( )
burn standard PES , and contracts that gave part of the payment to the farmer up
( )
front and unconditionally, with the remainder paid conditionally after verification
up-front PES .2
( )
Our main finding is that, despite smaller conditional payments, up-front PES had
10 percentage points pp higher contract compliance than standard PES. Remote
( )
sensing measures of burning confirm this result and, importantly, highlight the infra-
marginality of PES compliance under the standard contract. Specifically, farmers
offered up-front PES burn 7.7 to 11.5 pp less than the control group. In contrast,
standard PES had no effect on burning compared to the control group; farmers who
complied in this arm would not have burned even if PES had not been offered.
Consistent with the compliance and burning results, farmers in the up-front PES
arm were 9.5 pp more likely than those in the control group to report removing crop
residue with balers, while farmers in the standard PES arm reported no increase in
the use of balers or other residue management equipment. Our findings indicate
2 Our design has subtreatments that vary specifics of the standard or up-front PES contract, but our primary
empirical specification pools subtreatments, as specified in our preanalysis plan.

VOL. 7 NO. 1 JACK ET AL.: MONEY (NOT) TO BURN 41
that appropriately designed incentive contracts, particularly those with an up-front
payment component, can help policymakers make headway on this critical but dif-
ficult problem.
While up-front contracts are more effective at reducing burning, farmers
receive up-front payments regardless of compliance, making them potentially less
cost-effective than standard PES contracts. We calculate the cost per additional
unburned acre and find that up-front PES is at least as cost-effective as standard
PES. Up-front PES costs 2,695 $34 to 4,050 $51 per averted acre of burning,
( ) ( )
less than the analogous n₹oisy estimate fo₹r standard PES.3
( )
Our study contributes to the literature on PES by comparing alternative contract
structures and, more specifically, by testing a novel contract design aimed at address-
ing institutional constraints and market failures that are common in lower-income
countries and may limit the effectiveness of standard PES contracts. While some
prior studies compare PES to a no-PES counterfactual Jayachandran et al. 2017
( )
and others have discussed the importance of careful PES design Wunder, Engel,
(
and Pagiola 2008; Engel, Pagiola, and Wunder 2008; Jack 2013; Kaczan et al. 2017;
Oliva et al. 2020 , we are unaware of prior work comparing PES contract struc-
)
tures. Furthermore, whereas most previous research focuses on PES to avert land
use change e.g., deforestation , we join a small set of studies applying the con-
( )
cept to air pollution Edwards et al. 2020; Kramer and Ceballos 2018 . We also
( )
contribute to the broader literature on conditional cash transfers, which are used
to encourage a wide range of socially desirable activities beyond environmental
protection. Several studies have tested the importance of payment conditionality or
timing Baird, McIntosh, and Özler 2011; Akresh, de Walque, and Kazianga 2013;
(
Attanasio, Oppedisano, and Vera-Hernández 2015; Adhvaryu et al. 2023 . Our con-
)
tribution is to test a hybrid contract that combines a conditional payment and an
unconditional up-front transfer.4
I. Background and Study Design
A. Crop Residue Burning and Policy Responses
About 80 percent of the planted area in the North Indian state of Punjab is cul-
tivated using an annual rice-wheat dual crop system. Rice is farmed in Kharif
June–October and wheat in Rabi November–April , with a short time window to
( ) ( )
transition between crops. The introduction of mechanized harvesting in the 1980s
facilitated adoption of this crop system and also created a need to manage crop res-
idue: mechanized rice harvesting leaves 8 to 12 inches of stalk, representing over
2.5 tonnes of residue per acre of rice Jain, Bhatia, and Pathak 2014 . Controlled
( )
burning has emerged as the primary method for clearing crop residue.5
3 Despite insignificant effects on burning, cost-effectiveness for standard PES is still well-defined using the
estimated coefficients and standard errors.
4 Related research includes Casaburi and Willis 2018, who test payment timing in insurance contracts, and
( )
Aker and Jack 2023, who evaluate the impact of payment timing on agricultural technology take-up.
5 Restriction ( s on ) groundwater use and rising wages have contributed to the growth of residue burning Singh
(
et al. 2019; Behrer 2019; Garg, Jagnani, and Pullabhotla 2021.
)

42 AER: INSIGHTS MARCH 2025
Recognizing the detrimental environmental consequences of residue burning,
a 2015 court judgment prohibited the practice and directed North Indian state
governments to levy fines ranging from 2,500 to 15,000, based on farmers’
landholdings Bhuvaneshwari, Hettiarachch₹i, and Mee₹goda 2019; National Green
(
Tribunal 2015 . Agricultural lobby opposition and weak enforcement have ham-
)
pered implementation of this penalty-based policy. In 2017, the central government
announced a two-year, $144 million program for the states of Punjab, Haryana, and
Uttar Pradesh to subsidize in situ crop residue management CRM equipment like
( )
the Happy Seeder. In situ equipment keeps residue on the plot and sows the next
crop directly through the residue. The subsidy program did not cover ex situ equip-
ment that removes residue from the fields; such equipment includes balers, which
bundle and then remove residue from the plot.6
Despite this subsidy scheme, CRM equipment rental costs remain high. Farmers
typically rent equipment via hiring centers or agricultural cooperatives, which
receive an 80 percent subsidy on equipment purchases. According to our baseline
survey, the median Happy Seeder rental cost was 1,250 per acre, with a total in
situ residue management cost of about 3,000 per a₹cre. Farmers may prefer unsub-
sidized ex situ methods because they ar₹e cheaper e.g., renting a baler costs around
(
1,000 per acre or are perceived as less damaging to yields.
)
₹ Introducing a PES program effectively decreases the price of renting either ex
situ or in situ equipment. However, the fact that PES payments occur after residue
has been removed means that liquidity constraints can be a barrier to CRM equip-
ment use. In addition, farmers may not trust that the payment will be made ex post
as promised. At baseline, only 13 percent of farmers stated that they entirely trusted
the government, while only 7 percent trusted NGOs. Less than half had 5,000 in
savings, and the majority identified acquiring a 5,000 loan as somewha₹t difficult
or difficult. A typical study farmer has 5 acres ₹of rice production and would pay
(
15,000 to rent in situ equipment and 5,000 to rent a baler.
)
₹ ₹
B. PES Contracts and Randomization Design
We offered treated farmers either standard or partial up-front payment PES con-
tracts 58 and 62 villages, respectively . Each treatment had two subtreatments,
( )
which we prespecified pooling for the main analyses.
Based on discussions with the Punjab government about a scalable payment level,
we set our base standard PES contract, which pays out only once the absence of
burning is verified, at 800 per acre. To assess the importance of payment amounts,
we introduced another₹ standard PES contract that pays twice as much, 1,600 per
acre.7
₹
6 Baled straw is often used as an industrial heat source. Nian 2023 finds that, in China, biomass power plants
( )
reduced residue burning.
7 In November 2019 after our intervention, the federal court ordered the Punjab government to pay farmers
( )
100 per quintal of paddy, or about 2,500 per acre, conditional on self-reported not burning. Concerns about the
( )
₹veracity of farmers’ self-declaration₹s that they did not burn led to the program’s suspension a few weeks later. In our
endline survey, about 30 percent of the sample was aware of the government program, and most of them reported
learning about the program after having begun residue management.

VOL. 7 NO. 1 JACK ET AL.: MONEY (NOT) TO BURN 43
Our second treatment arm addressed trust and liquidity concerns by paying a por-
tion up front and the rest contingent on verified nonburning. To match our base con-
tract, the sum of the potential up-front and ex post payments was set at 800. The
( )
only difference between the two subtreatments was whether 25 percent or 5₹0 percent
was paid up front. Supplemental Appendix Figure A1 summarizes the experimental
design, which also includes a status quo control group 51 villages .8 Supplemental
( )
Appendix Figure A2 depicts the timeline for data collection and agricultural activities.
While up-front payments, in principle, could be recouped from a noncompli-
ant participant, doing so is challenging e.g., because participants are poor . Our
( )
contract explicitly made the up-front payment unconditional, without increasing
the total potential payment. This means that the conditional amount––the farmer’s
incentive to comply––is lower in the up-front contract, which could potentially
result in lower compliance than with standard PES. Even if compliance increases,
unconditional payments may lower PES cost-effectiveness since farmers who do not
comply will still receive up-front payments. Farmers’ participation in all treatments
(
was voluntary, with contract noncompliance only “penalized” by nonpayment of the
conditional component.
)
C. Sampling and Baseline Survey
Bathinda and Faridkot in Punjab were chosen as study districts because they had
high rates of burning and relatively few other organizations working to encourage
CRM adoption. We identified the 300 villages with the most farmer cooperative
members using membership lists and then screened farmers for eligibility by phone
in fall 2019. Farmers were eligible if they grew 2–12 acres of paddy, planned to
harvest after the second week of October and plant a rabi crop, and used farm equip-
ment that was indicative of burning specifically, a reaper or no chopper the previ-
( )
ous year. The last criterion means that our sample had higher burning than average;
by minimizing inframarginal payments through sample design, we increased statis-
tical power to detect changes.9
We conducted a baseline survey in October 2019, prioritizing villages based on
the number of eligible households. Baseline data collection ended when the target
sample of 176 villages was reached. Enumerators moved down a randomly ordered
list of cooperative members within a village, surveying the identified person on the
list until 16 surveys were completed or the list was exhausted. Villages with fewer
than six completed baseline surveys were excluded, resulting in a final sample of
171 villages and 1,668 respondents.
In over 90 percent of households, the person surveyed made household agricul-
tural decisions. We collected data on demographics, agricultural production, income
and credit constraints, trust in organizations, and barriers to CRM use. Over half of
study farmers’ household income is from agriculture, with a control group mean
agricultural profit of 114,000 median: 58,000 . Roughly half 48 percent had
( ) ( )
₹ ₹
8 Randomization occurred concurrently with household listing and baseline surveys. We stratify on district,
below above median number of eligible households, and whether the baseline and listing survey were finished. A
/
fifth strata of 15 villages was added after initial randomization.
9 Supplemental Appendix Table A1 compares eligible farmers to all farmers, based on a census of four study
villages.

44 AER: INSIGHTS MARCH 2025
ever signed a written contract. As per our preanalysis plan, we construct distrust
and financial constraints indices from baseline data. We also construct CRM equip-
ment access indices; access might affect PES compliance but to a similar degree
in standard and up-front PES see Supplemental Appendix D for survey questions
(
used for indices . In the survey, farmers listed all paddy plots and accompanied
)
the enumerator to collect geocoded plot perimeter measurements. Plot perimeters
formed the basis for monitoring farmers’ contract compliance and for linking satel-
lite imagery to plots.10
D. Contract Implementation
J-PAL enumerators offered eligible farmers in treatment villages a PES contract,
typically within a week of the baseline survey. The enumerator read the contract pro-
visions to interested farmers Supplemental Appendix C shows a sample contract .
( )
Enumerators recorded whether the farmer was offered the PES contract, reasons
for not offering it e.g., farmer could not be found or lacked a bank account , and
( )
whether he accepted.11 Farmers who took up the contract received a handout detail-
ing contract terms and burning verification procedures. Their entire paddy acreage
as measured during the baseline survey was enrolled. The contract capped the
( )
maximum farmer payment at 16,000 in the 1,600 per acre arm and 8,000 in other
treatment arms.12 Farmers in₹ the up-front P₹ES arm received bank d₹eposits two to
three days after take-up.
Contract monitoring and enforcement required verifying that paddy plots were not
burned. Visual inspection post-harvest and before tilling can ascertain whether or not
a plot was burned. Monitoring too early, before residue management is completed,
cannot rule out future burning; monitoring too late, post-tilling, might miss signs of
burning. Since the project staff had to monitor the plot within a farmer-specific win-
dow of a few days, the farmer was made responsible for contacting J-PAL after resi-
due management and at least four days before rabi tilling.13 Placing this onus on the
farmer might lower contract compliance but was necessary for accurate, affordable
monitoring. Field staff then visited and inspected each plot, walking onto it, inspect-
ing the soil, and checking the perimeter. They recorded several specific observa-
tions, such as the presence of burned straw, gray or black ash on the soil, and burned
roots, grass, weeds, or tree branches at the plot boundaries. Outcomes across plots
were aggregated into a single farmer-level compliance metric––any burning was a
contract violation. Compliant farmers were paid within three days of monitoring.
10 Because plots were measured before treatment assignment, measurement error should be orthogonal to treat-
ment. We drop 47 plots 1.6 percent where the plot ID was missing from the geospatial data or two plots com-
( )
pletely overlap.
11 Contract payments were electronic, with bank account information only collected from treatment farmers.
Only six farmers were screened out for lack of a bank account.
12 For the 7 percent of farmers cultivating 10 acres of paddy eligibility required 12 acres, the poten-
> ( ≤ ) (
tial payment is constrained by the cap.
)13
Farmers who had not yet requested monitoring were reminded in late October to do so. Up to two monitoring
visits could be requested to accommodate separate plots having different planting schedules.

VOL. 7 NO. 1 JACK ET AL.: MONEY (NOT) TO BURN 45
E. Outcome Data
Contract Take-Up and Compliance.—Contract take-up was recorded at the time
of the contract offer. Compliance is an indicator for whether a farmer requested
monitoring and all his plots were assessed as harvested and unburned during the
monitoring visits.
Remote Sensing Measures.—Contract compliance is uninformative about unmon-
itored farmers’ burning. Some control group farmers and some treatment group
farmers who did not enroll or request monitoring may not have burned. Following
our preanalysis plan, our primary outcome is a satellite-based burning measure con-
structed for all study farmers.
We train a random forest RF model using validated ground data and
( ) ( )
high-resolution satellite imagery for a subset of plots. Our validated data comprises
monitoring data for treatment farmers and data from spot checks conducted on one
randomly selected plot for 50 percent of farmers per village in November 2019. Spot
checks and monitoring visits followed similar protocols; however, unlike monitor-
ing visits, spot checks could not be synchronized with the farmer’s residue man-
agement timing.14 The satellite imagery comes from two complementary sources,
PlanetScope and Sentinel-2.15 The higher frequency PlanetScope data roughly
(
every two to three days is less likely to miss burning events. This is important
)
because burned plots become observationally similar to unburned plots once the soil
is tilled for rabi planting see Supplemental Appendix Figure A3 for an example .
( )
Sentinel-2 data every seven to ten days also covers the mid-infrared range, which
( )
helps distinguish burned and unburned plots.
Our labeled set of 681 plots includes burn labels positives from both the spot
( )
checks and the monitoring data and no-burn labels negatives from only the moni-
( )
toring data.16 We train the RF model using these labeled data burn or no-burn and
( )
pixel-level data from the two sensors.
The RF model outputs a pixel-level continuous score ranging from zero to one, rep-
resenting the proportion of decision trees per pixel classified as burned by the model.
To aggregate pixel-level scores to a plot-level burning outcome, we average the score
across pixels in a plot omitting perimeter pixels and select the plot-level classifi-
( )
cation threshold above which a plot in the training data is classified as burned that
( )
maximizes overall prediction accuracy relative to the plot-level label. To avoid model
overfitting, we hold out each multipixel plot from the training set and obtain a pre-
( )
diction for the held-out pixels leave-one-out cross-validation . The trained models
( )
are averaged and applied to both labeled and unlabeled plots. Specifically, we use the
trained pixel-level RF model to predict pixel-level outcomes, then apply the classifi-
cation threshold from the training set to aggregate up to the plot level. This procedure
14 Another difference is that observations occurred without walking onto the plot. We do not use spot check data
as a primary outcome because sufficient statistical power would have required repeated visits, which might have
directly affected behavior.
15 PlanetScope has 3-meter resolution and Sentinel-2, 20-meter. Other commonly used sensors MODIS and
(
VIIRS have lower resolution, 375 meters to 1 kilometer, which is too coarse for the small plots in our study.
16 W ) e exclude negative labels from spot checks because they indicate no burning in days immediately preceding
the spot check visit but provide no information about burning outside that window. Supplemental Appendix E finds
no indication of bias from the lack of negative labels in the control group.

46 AER: INSIGHTS MARCH 2025
produces our primary “maximum accuracy” outcome measure, which has 82 percent
accuracy. Since the maximum accuracy classification predicts burn outcomes more
accurately than no-burn outcomes, we provide a robustness check using an alter-
native classification threshold that balances the accuracy of predicting burning and
nonburning in the training data. This “balanced accuracy” outcome measure has 78
percent accuracy. Supplemental Appendix E and Walker et al. 2022 provide addi-
( )
tional detail on the data, data processing, and machine learning model.
When assessing treatment effects, we invert the burning classification to obtain
an “unburned” measure that is directionally consistent with other contract outcomes
such that a higher value is an environmental improvement . If a farmer is predicted
( )
to have burned any of his plots, the farmer-level unburned outcome equals zero.
Endline Survey.—We conducted a phone-based endline survey in June 2020,
after rabi harvest. We collected information about baler ex situ and Happy Seeder
( )
in situ use, the importance of cash and trust in decisions about burning the previ-
( )
ous fall, and agricultural outcomes.
F. Experimental Validity
We report four balance tests: pooled treatment arms versus control group, stan-
dard PES versus control group, up-front PES versus control group, and up-front
PES versus standard PES see Supplemental Appendix Table A2 . The p-value of
( )
the joint F-test is 0.48 between treatment and control and 0.81 between standard and
up-front PES. Self-reported burning in 2018 is balanced in each comparison. We
observe slight imbalance for land size and CRM indices in some tests.
Our PES compliance and remotely sensed burning outcomes have no attri-
tion. In the endline survey, which had 17 percent attrition overall, the treatment
group response rate was 5 pp lower than the control group, while the standard and
up-front PES response rates were similar see Supplemental Appendix Table A3 .
( )
Supplemental Appendix Table A4 shows that this endline attrition does not vary
systematically with baseline characteristics. For analyses using endline survey data,
we show robustness to using Lee bounds Lee 2009 .
( )
II. Results
We estimate the following equation:
1 y StandardPES UpfrontPES X ,
( ) ij = α + β j + γ j + ψ j + εi j
where y denotes an outcome for farmer i in village j , and StandardPES and
i j j
UpfrontPES are indicator variables for village j assignment to standard PES and
j
up-front PES treatments, respectively. X are strata fixed effects. Following our
j
preanalysis plan, and to increase statistical power, we pool treatment variants dif-
(
ferent payment levels in StandardPES and different proportions paid up front in
j
UpfrontPES . Standard errors are clustered at the village level. and capture the
j ) β γ
effects of being assigned to the standard PES treatment and up-front PES treatment,
respectively relative to the control group .
( )

VOL. 7 NO. 1 JACK ET AL.: MONEY (NOT) TO BURN 47
1 p = 0.72 p 0.63
=
0.88 0.88
0.84 0.83 p 0.8
=
0.8
0.73 0.72
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
A. Did Farmers Take Up PES Contract Offers?
Figure 1 reports three treatment effects. We first show whether the farmer was
found during the contract offer visit and whether he was eligible for and offered the
contract had a bank account and had not yet harvested his paddy . These outcomes
( )
are zero by construction in the control group and are determined for treatment farm-
ers before they learned their contract type. We observe no differences in these out-
comes between the standard and up-front PES arms.
The third outcome shown in Figure 1 is program take-up whether a farmer
(
signed the PES contract , which is also zero by construction for control farmers. In
)
both treatment arms, take-up was high, at 72 percent.17 Conditional on being found
and eligible, the contract take-up rate was 87 percent. This is consistent with the
contract’s high option value in both treatments because farmers who choose to burn
forgo the conditional payments but incur no penalties. The lack of additional take-up
in the up-front PES arm may reflect trust concerns that were not resolved through
up-front payments, such as objections to sharing bank account information and the
two-to-three-day lag between signing and receiving up-front cash.
B. Did PES Treatment Farmers Reduce Crop Residue Burning?
Table 1, column 1, examines treatment impacts on contract compliance—that is,
if the farmer requested monitoring and no plots were recorded as burned during the
17 Supplemental Appendix Table A6 shows similar take-up rates across all subtreatments.
sremraf
fo
erahS
Standard PES
Up-front PES
Farmer found Farmer eligible Contract take-up
Figure 1. Contract Eligibility and Take-Up
Notes: “Farmer found” equals one if the respondent was available during the PES contract offer visit. “Farmer
eligible” equals one if the respondent was available, had a bank account, and had not yet managed his crop residue.
“Contract take-up” equals one if the respondent signed a contract to participate in the PES program. Treatment effects
are estimated using equation 1, which includes strata fixed effects and clusters standard errors at the village level.
( )

48 AER: INSIGHTS MARCH 2025
Table 1—Contract Compliance, Not Burning, and CRM Use
Unburned CRM techniques
Complied with Max. Balanced
contract accuracy accuracy Baler Seeder
1 2 3 4 5
( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
Standard PES 0.085 0.020 0.008 0.010 0.020
− −
0.015 0.030 0.042 0.037 0.023
( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
Up-front PES 0.183 0.077 0.115 0.096 0.013
0.020 0.032 0.042 0.039 0.026
( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
p-value: standard PES up-front PES 0.000 0.071 0.008 0.014 0.157
=
Control mean 0.000 0.091 0.202 0.199 0.102
Standard PES mean 0.084 0.098 0.198 0.171 0.087
Up-front PES mean 0.185 0.161 0.313 0.295 0.112
Observations 1,668 1,664 1,664 1,387 1,387
Notes: “Complied with contract” equals one if the respondent called to request monitoring of his plots and the
monitoring determination was that the respondent complied with the contract i.e., did not burn his crop residue.
( )
“Unburned” equals one if the farmer did not burn any of his plots based on the remote sensing model and a classifi-
cation threshold that maximizes overall accuracy “Max. accuracy” or balanced accuracy in predicting burned and
( )
unburned plots “Balanced accuracy”. “Baler” equals one if the farmer reported in the endline survey that he used
( )
a baler to manage his residue the previous fall. “Seeder” equals one if the farmer reported in the endline that he used
a Happy Seeder or a Super Happy Seeder to manage his residue. Treatment effects are estimated using equation 1,
( )
which includes strata fixed effects and clusters standard errors at the village level.
monitoring visit s . In the standard PES group, 8.5 percent of farmers complied.
( )
Compliance in the up-front arm is 10 pp higher, at 18 percent. Equality between the
two groups can be rejected with p 0.01.18 Thus, up-front payments make farm-
<
ers twice as likely to comply with the contract.
Next, we analyze remote sensing measures of whether a farmer burned any plots.
Column 2 uses our main outcome and shows that, relative to the control group,
up-front PES increases the likelihood that a farmer did not burn by 7.7 pp, or 85
percent, relative to the control group. The modest effect size in absolute terms most
(
farmers still burned suggests that most farmers’ full opportunity cost of alterna-
) ( )
tives to burning was higher than the payment level.
Unlike the estimate for up-front PES, the effect of standard PES relative to the
control group is indistinguishable from zero. Thus, standard PES payments were
entirely inframarginal: farmers who complied with the standard PES contract would
not have burned their plots even in the absence of the program. The p-value for the
comparison of the effect on burning for up-front versus standard PES is 0.07. In
column 3, we report results using the alternative balanced accuracy measure and see
that up-front PES reduces burning by 11.5 pp relative to the control group and 9.8
pp relative to standard PES p-value 0.01 .
( < )
While the effect sizes for the two remote sensing measures—based on different
classification thresholds––are broadly similar 7.7 and 11.5 pp for up-front PES rel-
(
ative to control , Supplemental Appendix Figure A4 further explores sensitivity of
)
the effect sizes to the threshold for classifying burning. As the threshold increases,
pixels and plots are more likely to be relabeled as burned, so the control mean for
18 Treatment effects on whether the farmer requested monitoring regardless of compliance follow a similar
( )
pattern; 11 percent of farmers in standard PES requested monitoring versus 21 percent in the up-front arm.

VOL. 7 NO. 1 JACK ET AL.: MONEY (NOT) TO BURN 49
being unburned decreases, and this mechanically decreases the estimated treatment
effects. For up-front PES, the treatment effect is always statistically significantly
positive except at the most extreme threshold. Standard PES never has a statistically
significant effect. Supplemental Appendix Table A5 shows additional robustness
checks. First, we report plot-level analysis; 18 percent of farmers had at least one
plot predicted to be burned and also at least one plot predicted to be unburned.
Plot-level treatment effects are of similar magnitude to our main farmer-level result.
Second, treatment effects estimated on spot check data are also similar in magnitude
but with considerably lower statistical power and an unburned rate in the control
group that is mechanically higher because the one-time plot visit missed some burns.
Though we lack statistical power to test for arm-by-arm differences, we describe
the effects of each of the four subtreatments briefly see Supplemental Appendix
(
Table A6 . Paying more in the standard PES contract 1,600 versus 800 results
) ( )
in statistically insignificant increases in compliance and₹ nonburning. C₹ompliance is
lower in the 1,600 arm than in either up-front PES arm. This is striking given that
the up-front c₹ontract only pays 800 per acre. It is theoretically ambiguous which of
the two up-front arms 25 perc₹ent up front versus 50 percent up front should per-
( )
form better; increasing the fraction paid up front meant a lower reward for compli-
ance. We find similar effects for the two variants, with slightly larger but statistically
indistinguishable impacts when 50 percent is paid up front.
In columns 4 and 5 of Table 1, we report treatment effects on the main ex situ and
in situ alternatives to burning: self-reported baler and Happy Seeder use. Increased
baler usage––by 10 pp––can explain all of the reduced burning achieved through
up-front PES; every farmer who switched away from burning due to up-front PES
seems to have switched to baling their straw. The lower and upper Lee bound point
(
estimates are 8.8 and 14.5 pp; see Supplemental Appendix Table A7. There are no
)
detectable changes in Happy Seeder use in the up-front arm. Consistent with the null
effect of standard PES on our remote sensing burning measures, we see no difference
in baler or Happy Seeder use in the standard PES arm relative to the control group.19
C. Why Did Up-Front PES Increase Compliance?
Up-front PES reduces burning more than standard PES. We hypothesize that two
mechanisms, distrust in the conditional payment and limited cash on hand to rent
CRM equipment, may be important for explaining this result. Following our preanal-
ysis plan, we test for heterogeneous treatment effects based on baseline indices for
each mechanism.20 In Table 2, panel A, we find that up-front PES performed no bet-
ter than standard PES for farmers with high liquidity constraints or high distrust.21
19 Besides lower costs, farmers cite less delay in sowing the rabi crop and higher agricultural yields as benefits
of burning. We test for these effects in Supplemental Appendix Table A8. The average effects are statistically insig-
nificant, but the confidence intervals and Lee bounds are wide.
20 Supplemental Appendix Table A10 presents additional prespecified heterogeneous treatment effects that per-
tain to the overall effect of PES. Farmers with greater information constraints and more negative beliefs about burn-
ing alternatives are less likely to comply with PES, pooling the treatment arms. Supplemental Appendix Table A9
also tests whether program take-up is differential by five prespecified indices liquidity, distrust, information about
(
CRM alternatives, CRM access constraints, and negative beliefs about burning alternatives.
21 This null result, like any heterogeneity on observables, may indicate that the measure ) s are bad proxies for the
construct, are correlated with other factors, or have limited variation in our sample.

50 AER: INSIGHTS MARCH 2025
Table 2—Liquidity and Distrust as Moderators of Treatment Effects
Outcome variable Complied with contract Unburned maximum accuracy
( )
Type of constraint Distrust Liquidity Distrust Liquidity
1 2 3 4
( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
Panel A. Liquidity constraints and distrust
Up-front PES 0.114 0.088 0.054 0.051
0.030 0.029 0.029 0.029
( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
Highly constrained 0.030 0.010 0.003 0.014
0.024 0.022 0.025 0.030
( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
Up-front PES Highly constrained 0.032 0.018 0.025 0.022
× − − −
0.036 0.038 0.039 0.042
( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
Standard PES mean 0.083 0.084 0.104 0.105
Up-front PES mean 0.185 0.185 0.143 0.142
Observations 1,172 1,182 1,168 1,178
Trusted Cash shortage
payment not important
1 2
( ) ( )
Panel B. Trust in payment and importance of cash shortage
Up-front PES 0.068 0.038
0.028 0.043
( ) ( )
Standard PES mean 0.854 0.441
Observations 580 584
Notes: Panel A: The row labeled “Type of constraint” indicates the heterogeneity variable analyzed in each column.
“Distrust” is an index of the farmer’s distrust in categories of people and organizations. “Liquidity” is an index of
liquidity constraints, including constrained access to cash and loans. All heterogeneity variables are binary and
equal one if the farmer’s constraints are above the sample median. The outcome variable is indicated in the top
row: “Complied with Contract” equals one if monitoring showed no signs of burning. “Unburned” equals one if the
farmer did not burn any of his plots based on the remote sensing model and a classification threshold that maximizes
overall accuracy “maximum accuracy”. Treatment effects are estimated using a modified version of equation 1,
( ) ( )
which omits the control group and includes both a level and an interaction term with Up-front PES for the het-
( )
erogeneity variable, includes strata fixed effects, and clusters standard errors at the village level. The omitted group
is the standard PES treatment. Panel B: “Trusted payment” equals one if the respondent trusted that the payment
by J-PAL would be made if they did not burn their paddy residue. “Cash shortage not important” equals one if the
respondent said that cash shortage was not an important factor when deciding which CRM method to use. These
outcome variables are from the endline survey. Treatment effects are estimated using a modified version of equa-
tion 1, which omits the control group, includes strata fixed effects, and clusters standard errors at the village level.
( )
The omitted category is the standard PES treatment. Only those who signed a contract are included in the sample.
In the endline survey, we asked a subset 63 percent of farmers in both treatment
( )
arms about trust in the PES program and financial constraints influencing their CRM
decisions.22 Farmers in the up-front arm were 7 pp more likely than farmers in the
standard PES arm to say they trusted that the conditional payment would be made
if they complied see Table 2 .23 In contrast, farmers in the up-front and standard
( )
PES arms did not differ in how important they said cash shortages were in their
CRM decision-making. This does not necessarily imply that up-front payments are
22 We only asked these questions to a subset of farmers because, due to respondent fatigue with a lengthy phone
survey, we reduced the survey duration halfway through the sample.
23 Trust in the conditional payment is higher in up-front PES for both compliant and noncompliant farmers.
Thus, trust appears to increase with receipt of the up-front payment rather than the conditional payment. In contrast,
in the standard PES arm, trust in the ex post payment depends on whether the farmer received it i.e., whether he
(
complied. At the same time, high levels of trust in all arms means that variation in trust cannot fully explain the
)
treatment effects.

VOL. 7 NO. 1 JACK ET AL.: MONEY (NOT) TO BURN 51
Amount paid per acre
₹500
₹400 p 0
=
310.5
₹300
Standard PES
Up-front PES
₹200
105.6
₹100
₹0
Cost per unburned acre
Maximum accuracy Balanced accuracy
₹30,000 p 0.88
=
₹150,000
p 0.86
=
₹20,000
₹100,000
₹10,000
₹50,000
5,156
4,051
13,441
2,695
₹0 ₹0
Figure 2. Cost-Effectiveness
Notes: “Amount paid per acre” is the per acre payment the farmer received. This includes the amount paid up front
for those in the up-front PES treatment, plus the amount paid conditional on compliance for those in the up-front
and standard PES treatments. Treatment effects are estimated using equation 1, which includes strata fixed effects
( )
and clusters standard errors at the village level. “Cost per unburned acre” is the “Amount paid per acre” divided by
“Unburned” Table 1, with standard errors calculated using the delta method.
( )
unimportant for easing liquidity constraints and enabling CRM equipment use, as
the up-front amount which could cover less than half the cost of baler rental may
( )
have been too low to meaningfully ease this constraint for most farmers.
III. Program Costs and Benefits
Although up-front PES is more effective than standard PES at reducing burn-
ing, relative cost-effectiveness is ambiguous because up-front payments are made
regardless of compliance. The top panel of Figure 2 shows that treatment effects
on contract payments per acre of rice cultivation zero by construction in the con-
(
trol group are higher in up-front PES due to higher compliance and to up-front
)
payments being made to all farmers who took up.
To assess cost-effectiveness, we estimate the cost per additional unburned acre
by dividing costs per acre cultivated from the top panel of Figure 2 by the treatment
effect on the remote sensing outcome measure reported in Table 1.24 The effect
24 Monitoring costs are around 11 and 22 per acre in standard and up-front PES, respectively. Enrollment costs
are 60 per acre in both arms. We o₹mit these₹ from our calculations because they are small and specific to our trial.
₹

52 AER: INSIGHTS MARCH 2025
of standard PES on nonburning is small and statistically imprecise, which makes
cost-effectiveness comparisons across arms highly imprecise. Specifically, using
our main remote sensing model maximum accuracy , up-front PES costs 4,050
( )
$51 per unburned acre, compared to 5,157 $64 for standard PES botto₹m-left
( ) ( ) (
panel of Figure 2 . With the alternative b₹alanced accuracy model, up-front PES costs
)
2,695 per unburned acre, compared to 13,441 for standard PES bottom-right
(
₹panel . Even with this stark difference in p₹oint estimates, the lack of precision when
)
comparing the estimates makes it hard to draw policy conclusions. Accordingly, we
conduct the cost-benefit calculation using results from the up-front arm only.25
We benchmark these costs against a rough estimate of the averted-mortality ben-
efits of reducing crop burning. Lan et al. 2022 combine satellite data on fire inten-
( )
sity with air transport models to estimate 86,000 premature deaths from crop residue
burning in India in 2018, 43 percent of which can be attributed to kharif burning
in Punjab.26 Estimates of the value of a statistical life for India range from around
$688,000 Majumder and Madheswaran 2018 to $5.6 million Madheswaran 2007 .
( ) ( )
Using the lower bound of this range as a conservative estimate, this implies over $25
billion in annual damages from burning in Punjab. Kumar et al. 2019 estimate that
( )
around 4 million acres of Punjab’s nonbasmati paddy was burned in the kharif sea-
( )
son of 2018. Combining these assumptions, the lower bound of mortality damages
of burning are about $6,400 per acre 513,000 , which is 125 to 190 times the per
( )
acre cost of reducing burning through₹ PES with up-front payment. Put differently,
the cost of up-front PES was $3,600 to $5,400 per life saved.
IV. Conclusion
Incentive programs that reward people for socially desirable actions are an espe-
cially attractive approach in developing countries due to the economic and gover-
nance environment: the alternative of mandating the action, with punishment for
noncompliance, risks economically harming the poor and can be unsuccessful when
state capacity is limited. Our study design and findings highlight the importance
of also factoring in these contextual realities when designing incentive programs.
In particular, limited access to short-term capital and distrust in institutions can
limit the effectiveness of standard PES contracts, as evidenced by better contract
outcomes when some payment was offered up front. This insight is likely to gener-
alize to other PES programs where participants incur immediate costs to comply or
distrust that the organization promising future payments will follow through. It also
generalizes beyond PES to conditional cash transfer programs more broadly.
Besides distrust and cash constraints, the modest payment levels we used presum-
ably lowered the impact of both the standard and up-front PES contracts. Our back-
of-the-envelope estimate of mortality costs suggests that the benefits of eliminating
crop residue burning are enormous. A scaled-up PES program could offer much
more generous payment levels and still be cost-effective.
25 Inputs to the cost-benefit calculations are provided in Supplemental Appendix F.
26 The impacts of pollution may be nonlinear, but a full accounting of marginal effects of burning for this back-
of-the-envelope calculation is beyond the scope of the paper.

VOL. 7 NO. 1 JACK ET AL.: MONEY (NOT) TO BURN 53
Scaling up the PES contracts we trialed would pose some new challenges. Our
monitoring protocols were not designed for scale. Viable approaches to large-scale
monitoring, such as remote sensing, are likely to increase contract risk because of
measurement error though different forms of contractual risks, such as corrup-
(
tion, may also exist with scaled-up in-person monitoring . In addition, equipment
)
to manage crop residue is still scarce, and PES at scale would increase demand
for this equipment, driving up rental prices unless supply constraints are addressed
simultaneously.
There is also cause for optimism. A scaled-up PES program could be considerably
more cost-effective than the one we evaluated, for several reasons. First, if trust is the
main barrier to compliance, a smaller up-front payment might suffice to mitigate dis-
trust. Second, higher overall payment levels would increase compliance, so fewer of
the up-front payments would be to those who burn, decreasing payments per complier
and improving cost-effectiveness. Third, dynamic incentives—in the form of tying
future eligibility to verified nonburning—could reduce the payment level needed to
achieve compliance and the likelihood that up-front payments go to those who con-
tinue to burn their residue. Fourth, the need for up-front payments might fade over
time as trust in the program increases. Similarly, a longer-term PES program might
stimulate the development of a market for short-term loans for equipment rental,
addressing liquidity constraints and obviating the need for long-term up-front pay-
ments. Furthermore, the rollout of a large-scale PES program would create incentives
for innovation in better CRM equipment or rental market efficiency.
These benefits still leave the political challenge that, due to cross-jurisdiction
externalities, cooperation across jurisdictions is needed for government implemen-
tation. Thus, a final attractive feature of PES programs is that they can be imple-
mented by organizations that want to reduce fires but lack the authority to levy fines.
The enormity of the environmental damages caused by crop residue burning in India
justifies such an investment and also highlights the need for further research to find
viable solutions to this problem.
REFERENCES
Adhvaryu, Achyuta, Jean-François Gauthier, Pamela Jakiela, and Dean Karlan. 2023. “Great Expec-
tations: Responses to Current and Future Transfers for Low-Income Individuals.” Unpublished.
Aker, Jenny C., and B. Kelsey Jack. 2023. “Harvesting the Rain: The Adoption of Environmental Tech-
nologies in the Sahel.” Review of Economics and Statistics. https://doi.org/10.1162/rest_a_01404.
Akresh, Richard, Damien de Walque, and Harounan Kazianga. 2013. “Cash Transfers and Child
Schooling: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation of the Role of Conditionality.” World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper 6340.
Aryal, Aashutosh, Venkataraman Lakshmi, Ben W. Chenault, and Sheetal Sekhri. 2023. “Bans with-
out Bite: Unabated Stubble Burning in India.” Unpublished.
Attanasio, Orazio P., Veruska Oppedisano, and Marcos Vera-Hernández. 2015. “Should Cash Trans-
fers Be Conditional? Conditionality, Preventive Care, and Health Outcomes.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 7 2 : 35–52.
( )
Baird, Sarah, Craig McIntosh, and Berk Özler. 2011. “Cash or Condition? Evidence from a Cash
Transfer Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 4 : 1709–53.
( )
Behrer, A. Patrick. 2019. “Earth, Wind and Fire: The Impact of Anti-poverty Efforts on Indian Agricul-
ture and Air Pollution.” Unpublished.
Bhuvaneshwari, S., Hiroshan Hettiarachchi, and Jay N. Meegoda. 2019. “Crop Residue Burning in
India: Policy Challenges and Potential Solutions.” International Journal of Environmental Research
and Public Health 16 5 : 832.
( )

54 AER: INSIGHTS MARCH 2025
Bikkina, Srinivas, August Andersson, Elena N. Kirillova, Henry Holmstrand, Suresh Tiwari, A. K.
Srivastava, Deewan S. Bisht, and Örjan Gustafsson. 2019. “Air Quality in Megacity Delhi Affected
by Countryside Biomass Burning.” Nature Sustainability 2 3 : 200–205.
( )
Casaburi, Lorenzo, and Jack Willis. 2018. “Time versus State in Insurance: Experimental Evidence
from Contract Farming in Kenya.” American Economic Review 108 12 : 3778–813.
( )
Cassou, Emilie. 2018. Agricultural Pollution: Field Burning. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
Chen, Jianmin, Chunlin Li, Zoran Ristovski, Andelija Milic, Yuantong Gu, Mohammad S. Islam,
Shuxiao Wang, et al. 2017. “A Review of Biomass Burning: Emissions and Impacts on Air Quality,
Health and Climate in China.” Science of the Total Environment 579: 1000–1034.
Dipoppa, Gemma, and Saad Gulzar. 2022. “Fires: The Political Economy and Health Impacts of Crop
Burning in South Asia.” Unpublished.
Edwards, Ryan B., Walter P. Falcon, Gracia Hadiwidjaja, Matthew M. Higgins, Rosamond L. Naylor,
and Sudarno Sumarto. 2020. “Fight Fire with Finance: A Randomized Field Experiment to Curtail
Land-Clearing Fire in Indonesia.” Unpublished.
Engel, Stefanie, Stefano Pagiola, and Sven Wunder. 2008. “Designing Payments for Environmental Ser-
vices in Theory and Practice: An Overview of the Issues.” Ecological Economics 65 4 : 663–74.
( )
Fuller, Richard, Philip J. Landrigan, Kalpana Balakrishnan, Glynda Bathan, Stephan Bose-O’Reilly,
Michael Brauer, Jack Caravanos, et al. 2022. “Pollution and Health: A Progress Update.” Lancet
Planetary Health 6 6 : E535–47.
( )
Garg, Teevrat, Maulik Jagnani, and Hemant K. Pullabhotla. 2021. “Agricultural Labor Exits Increase
Crop Fires.” Unpublished.
Ghude, Sachin D., D. M. Chate, C. Jena, G. Beig, R. Kumar, M. C. Barth, G. G. Pfister, S. Fadnavis,
and Prakash Pithani. 2016. “Premature Mortality in India Due to PM and Ozone Exposure.”
2.5
Geophysical Research Letters 43 9 : 4650–58.
( )
Govardhan, Gaurav, Rupal Ambulkar, Santosh Kulkarni, Ashok Vishnoi, Prafull Yadav, Begum
Abida Choudhury, Manoj Khare, and Sachin D. Ghude. 2023. “Stubble-Burning Activities in
North-Western India in 2021: Contribution to Air Pollution in Delhi.” Heliyon 9 6 : e16939.
( )
Jack, B. Kelsey. 2013. “Private Information and the Allocation of Land Use Subsidies in Malawi.”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 3 : 113–35.
( )
Jack, B. Kelsey, Seema Jayachandran, Namrata Kala, and Rohini Pande. 2021. Paying Farmers Not
to Burn: A Randomized Trial of Payments for Ecosystem Services in India. AEA RCT Registry.
https://doi.org/10.1257/rct.4508-2.2.
Jack, B. Kelsey, Seema Jayachandran, Namrata Kala, and Rohini Pande. 2025. Data and Code for:
“Money Not to Burn: Payments for Ecosystem Services to Reduce Crop Residue Burning.” Nash-
( )
ville, TN: American Economic Association; distributed by Inter-university Consortium for Political
and Social Research, Ann Arbor, MI. https://doi.org/10.3886/E195486V1.
Jain, Niveta, Arti Bhatia, and Himanshu Pathak. 2014. “Emission of Air Pollutants from Crop Residue
Burning in India.” Aerosol and Air Quality Research 14 1 : 422–30.
( )
Jayachandran, Seema, Joost De Laat, Eric F. Lambin, Charlotte Y. Stanton, Robin Audy, and Nancy
E. Thomas. 2017. “Cash for Carbon: A Randomized Trial of Payments for Ecosystem Services to
Reduce Deforestation.” Science 357 6348 : 267–73.
( )
Kaczan, David, Alexander Pfaff, Luz Rodriguez, and Elizabeth Shapiro-Garza. 2017. “Increasing the
Impact of Collective Incentives in Payments for Ecosystem Services.” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 86: 48–67.
Kramer, Berber, and Francisco Ceballos. 2018. “Enhancing Adaptive Capacity through Climate-Smart
Insurance: Theory and Evidence from India.” Unpublished.
Kumar, P., S. K. Rajpoot, V. Jain, S. Saxena, and S. S. Ray. 2019. “Monitoring of Rice Crop in Punjab
and Haryana with Respect to Residue Burning.” International Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote
Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences 42 3–W6 : 31–36.
( )
Lan, Ruoyu, Sebastian D. Eastham, Tianjia Liu, Leslie K. Norford, and Steven R. H. Barrett. 2022.
“Air Quality Impacts of Crop Residue Burning in India and Mitigation Alternatives.” Nature Com-
munications 13: 6537.
Lee, David S. 2009. “Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on Treatment
Effects.” Review of Economic Studies 76 3 : 1071–102.
( )
Lee, Ken, and Michael Greenstone. 2021. Air Quality Life Index: Annual Update. Chicago: Energy
Policy Institute.
Madheswaran, Subramaniam. 2007. “Measuring the Value of Statistical Life: Estimating Compensat-
ing Wage Differentials among Workers in India.” Social Indicators Research 84 1 : 83–96.
( )
Majumder, Agamoni, and S Madheswaran. 2018. “Value of Statistical Life in India: A Hedonic Wage
Approach.” Institute for Social and Economic Change Working Paper 407.

VOL. 7 NO. 1 JACK ET AL.: MONEY (NOT) TO BURN 55
National Green Tribunal. 2015. “Vikrant Kumar Tongad v. Environment Pollution Authority & Ors.”
Judgment. https://greentribunal.gov.in/sites/default/files/office_orders/Note_on_Judgments_as_
announced_on_10th_December_2015.pdf.
Nian, Yongwei. 2023. “Incentives, Penalties, and Rural Air Pollution: Evidence from Satellite Data.”
Journal of Development Economics 161: 103049.
Oanh, Nguyen Thi Kim, Didin Agustian Permadi, Philip K. Hopke, Kirk R. Smith, Nguyen Phan
Dong, and Anh Nguyet Dang. 2018. “Annual Emissions of Air Toxics Emitted from Crop Residue
Open Burning in Southeast Asia over the Period of 2010–2015.” Atmospheric Environment 187:
163–73.
Oliva, Paulina, B. Kelsey Jack, Samuel Bell, Elizabeth Mettetal, and Christopher Severen. 2020. “Tech-
nology Adoption under Uncertainty: Take-Up and Subsequent Investment in Zambia.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 102 3 : 617–32.
( )
Singh, Balwinder, Andrew J. McDonald, Amit K. Srivastava, and Bruno Gerard. 2019. “Tradeoffs
between Groundwater Conservation and Air Pollution from Agricultural Fires in Northwest India.”
Nature Sustainability 2 7 : 580–83.
( )
Walker, Kendra, Ben Moscona, B. Kelsey Jack, Seema Jayachandran, Namrata Kala, Rohini Pande,
Jiani Xue, and Marshall Burke. 2022. “Detecting Crop Burning in India Using Satellite Data.”
arXiv: 2209.10148.
Wunder, Sven, Stefanie Engel, and Stefano Pagiola. 2008. “Taking Stock: A Comparative Analysis of
Payments for Environmental Services Programs in Developed and Developing Countries.” Ecolog-
ical Economics 65 4 : 834–52.
( )