NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ZERO-SUM ENVIRONMENTS, THE EVOLUTION OF
EFFORT-SUPPRESSING BELIEFS, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Augustin Bergeron
Jean-Paul Carvalho
Joseph Henrich
Nathan Nunn
Jonathan L. Weigel
Working Paper 31663
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31663
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2023, Revised May 2024
We thank Toke Aidt, Ingela Alger, Maiguel Ballester, Roland Benabou, Chris Bidner, Paola
Conconi, Meredith Crowley, Gregory Dow, Martin Fiszbein, Paola Giuliano, Karla Hoff, Sriya
Iyer, Rachel Kranton, Max Kwiek, Suresh Naidu, Jonathan Newton, Jean-Philippe Platteau, Hillel
Rapoport, Imran Rasul, Arthur Robson, Michael Sacks, Claudia Senik, Moses Shayo, Ludvig
Sinander, Josh Tasoff, Thierry Verdier, Cole Williams, Peyton Young, Liyu Zheng, and
conference/seminar participants at the 2024 ASSA Annual Meeting, 2023 NBER Political
Economy Spring Meeting, 2023 ERINN Conference, British Academy Conference on Toward
‘Cohesive’ Societies, 10th Oxford workshop on Global Priorities, 2022 ASREC Annual
Conference, 2022 CNEH Conference, LSE Hayek workshop, PolEconUK, Simon Fraser
University, University of Cambridge, University of York, Aix-Marseille School of Economics,
George Mason University, University of Oxford, and University of Nottingham for useful
discussions and comments on the paper. We thank Michele Mary Bernadine, Grace Finley, and
Fernando Secco for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Augustin Bergeron, Jean-Paul Carvalho, Joseph Henrich, Nathan Nunn, and Jonathan
L. Weigel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Zero-Sum Environments, the Evolution of Effort-Suppressing Beliefs, and Economic Development
Augustin Bergeron, Jean-Paul Carvalho, Joseph Henrich, Nathan Nunn, and Jonathan L. Weigel
NBER Working Paper No. 31663
September 2023, Revised May 2024
JEL No. N10,O10,Q55
ABSTRACT
We study the evolution of belief systems that suppress productive effort, including beliefs about
envy, the importance of luck for success, witchcraft beliefs, and disdain for competitive effort.
Demotivating beliefs evolve when interactions are zero-sum. They improve short-run material
welfare by limiting excessive competition but reduce long-run growth. Demotivating beliefs also
drive a wedge between how well people do and how well they think they do. Whereas material
welfare is hump-shaped in demotivating beliefs, subjective well-being is decreasing. These
predictions are supported by data from two samples in the Democratic Republic of Congo and the
World Values Survey.
Augustin Bergeron Nathan Nunn
Department of Economics Vancouver School of Economics
University of Southern California University of British Columbia
Kaprielian Hall 6000 Iona Drive
Los Angeles, CA 90089 Vancouver, BC V6T 2E8
and NBER Canada
augustin.bergeron@usc.edu and NBER
nathan.nunn@ubc.ca
Jean-Paul Carvalho
Department of Economics Jonathan L. Weigel
University of Oxford Haas School of Business
Manor Road Bldg University of California, Berkeley
Manor Road Berkeley, CA 94720
Oxford OX1 3UQ United Kingdom and NBER
jean-paul.carvalho@economics.ox.ac.uk jweigel@berkeley.edu
Joseph Henrich
Department of Human Evolutionary Biology
Harvard University
11 Divinity Ave
Cambridge, MA 02138
joseph.henrich@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Beliefs and values that discourage effort and productive activity are surprisingly widespread
today and throughout history. They often take the form of warnings against, and even punish-
ment for, personal ambition and success. A well-known example is belief in witchcraft and the
evil eye, i.e., the ability of certain people to intentionally cause harm via supernatural means,
2014 2015 2022 2009
which acts as a psychic tax on success (Gershman, , , b, Henrich, ). However,
demotivating beliefs come in many forms and can even be found, although perhaps more subtly,
in industrialized countries. For example, in the Nordic countries, the laws of Jante state, “Du
skal ikke tro at du er noget” (“do not think that you are anything”), discourage personal pride or
aggrandizement. Similarly, in Australia and New Zealand, “tall poppy” beliefs encourage people
to cut down those who stand out in terms of personal achievement. In Japan, a common phrase
1
warnsthat“thenailthatsticksoutwillbehammereddown.” Otherformsofdemotivatingbelief
2006
systems include pessimistic beliefs in an “unjust world” (Bénabou and Tirole, ), fatalism
1996
(Whelan, ), and anti-materialistic beliefs that reduce the enjoyment of consumption (Flouri,
1999
). If such beliefs reduce effort and investment, why are they prevalent across the world and
throughout history?
We study this question theoretically and empirically by building on insights from anthro-
1962 1965 1967
pology about the ‘image of limited good,’ first highlighted by George Foster ( , , ,
1972
). According to Foster, the limited and fixed nature of resources in some settings means that
anything “good” in society is scarce and competed over. “If ‘Good’ exists in limited amounts
1965 296
which cannot be expanded,” Foster writes ( , p. ), “and if the system is closed, it follows
that an individual or a family can improve their position only at the expense of others” (emphasis in
original). In other words, the dominant presumption in many small-scale societies is that if
one person does better, somebody else must do worse. Based on ethnographic research, Foster
argued that this zero-sum worldview was at the root of individual decision-making and cultural
traits that curb daily social, economic, and political ambition. Such traits include beliefs in the
importance of moderation, feelings of envy and concerns about the envy of others, witchcraft
beliefs, an emphasis on the importance of sharing, and a de-emphasis on the value of hard
1
Sometimes these beliefs and norms are embedded in class-based status systems that stigmatize aspiration and
effortas“socialclimbing”(McCloskey,2010). Accordingly,BritishPrimeMinisterHerbertAsquithpraisedthestudents
ofhisOxfordCollegeforexhibiting“effortlesssuperiority.”
1

work and thrift. Foster believed that this worldview inhibited entrepreneurial activity, wealth
accumulation, innovation, and economic development.
The first contribution of this paper is to develop an evolutionary model exploring Foster’s
2
hypothesis. We find that demotivating beliefs can emerge and spread despite reducing in-
centives for productive effort and inhibiting economic development. They do so in zero-sum
environments, where benefits to one person are obtained at the expense of others. In the
model, members of the population match and engage in production. While an individual’s effort
increases their output, a fraction α of their output comes at the cost of their partner; thus, α
represents the zero-sumness of the environment. This production function captures a range of
economic interactions with different degrees of rivalry, ranging from merchants competing over
a fixed set of customers (a completely zero-sum situation) to business partners working together
inanenterprisebutdividingtheprofitsfromtheirjointendeavor(apartiallyzero-sumsituation).
Inthemodel,individualscanholddemotivatingbeliefsθ,i.e.,incorrectbeliefsaboutthereturn
toeffort. Individualscanalsohaveaneutralbeliefsystem(θ = 0)correspondingtothetruereturn
3
to effort. While individuals choose effort based on subjective beliefs, cultural evolution is driven
by the (true) material payoffs. Despite the distortions in effort generated by demotivating beliefs,
weshowthatsuchbeliefscansurviveandspreadwheneconomicinteractionsarepartlyzero-sum
and there is positive sorting (e.g., when people with the same cultural beliefs are geographically
or socially clustered). In such environments, the direct cost of holding a demotivating belief is
overwhelmed by the benefit of being matched with players who hold demotivating beliefs and
do not compete excessively with others. More broadly, people’s views of the world tend to be
distorted, and these distortions reflect the externalities present in their environment.
When interactions are zero-sum, effort is socially inefficient since it primarily redistributes
resources, and demotivating beliefs improve short-run efficiency by limiting excessive competi-
tion. As a result, within a society with a given degree of zero-sumness, there is an intensity of
demotivating belief θ∗ > 0 that maximizes an individual’s income. Thus, the model predicts a
2
Evolutionary models are underutilized in economics, especially in connection with empirical work. Given the
extensiveevidencethatculturalvalueschangeandadapttotheexternalenvironment(e.g.,Tabellini,2008,Bisinand
Verdier,2017),itiscrucialtohavetheoryandpredictionsinasettingwherevaluesandbeliefsareinmotionandnot
assumedtobefixedorinsomestableequilibrium.
3
Weusetheterm‘beliefsystem’orsimply‘belief’todenoteaculturaltraitsuchasbeliefinwitchcraftoranunjust
worldratherthanaprobabilitydistributionoverknownstatesoftheworld,asisconventionalineconomics. Hence,we
treatthesebeliefsasbeingupdatednotthroughBayesianlearningbasedonfrequentfeedbackfromtheenvironment
butthroughsociallearningandotherformsofculturalevolution.
2

hump-shaped (strictly concave) relationship between demotivating beliefs and economic welfare.
However, this same relationship is not found for subjective well-being. Because demotivating
beliefs make an individual’s situation seem worse than it is, it reduces their perceived well-
being. For a given degree of zero-sumness, subjective well-being is maximized at the true
(non-demotivating) belief θ = 0, strictly convex, and typically decreasing in demotivating beliefs.
Thus, our model generates testable predictions about the divergence between material welfare
and subjective well-being.
Having derived predictions focusing on cross-individual variation in an environment with
a fixed degree of zero-sumness, we then turn to the model’s predictions across societies and
environmentswithdifferentdegreesofzero-sumness. Lookingacrossgroups,themodelpredicts
a positive relationship between the zero-sumness of the environment and demotivating beliefs.
Additionally – and in contrast to predictions within a fixed zero-sum environment – the model
predicts that both the zero-sumness of the environment and demotivating beliefs are negatively
related to material welfare and subjective well-being. These negative relationships are due to the
direct negative effect of zero-sum interactions on both objective and subjective payoffs.
Having formalized and further developed Foster’s arguments, we turn to the data and test
the model’s predictions. We begin by analyzing data collected from Kananga, an urban hub
and provincial capital in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). The city is home to
18
approximately . millionpeopleoriginallyfromvillagesandtownsacrosstheprovincesofKasaï,
KasaïCentral,andKasaïOriental. Althoughithousesalarge,diversepopulation,thecityremains
pre-industrial. By some accounts, it is the largest city in the world without consistent electricity
or running water. Nearly all roads are unpaved, and agriculture and animal husbandry are
common even on urban properties. We use this urban, pre-industrial setting to test the model’s
prediction of a positive relationship between the zero-sumness of a person’s environment and
200
theirdemotivatingbeliefs. Weanalyzedatafromtwosamples: a -personsamplefromsurveys
2015 1000 2019 2015
collectedin anda , -personsample collectedin . Weuse the sampleto develop
our zero-sum measure and explore its relationship with demotivating beliefs. We then replicate
2019
and validate the findings in the larger sample.
To measure the zero-sumness of a respondent’s environment – α in the model – we use
multiple survey questions asking whether each of the following types of gains comes at the
expenseofothers: earnings,profits,wealth,gainsintrade,power,andhappiness. Usingprincipal
3

components analysis, we can distill one factor that captures the extent to which a person views
their world as being zero-sum, which is the baseline zero-sum measure used in the analysis.
We estimate the relationship between the zero-sumness of a person’s environment and the
demotivating beliefs that were the focus of Foster’s ethnography: envy and traditional religious
beliefs, commonly called ‘witchcraft.’ We also consider beliefs in Christianity, which is the
alternative to traditional religion in the area. In contrast to traditional beliefs, Christianity,
particularlyinpopularPentecostaldenominations,emphasizesthatdevotionandhardworklead
to prosperity and blessing from God. In both samples, respondents who report a more zero-sum
environment are more envious of the success of others, more likely to hold traditional religious
beliefs, and less likely to hold Christian beliefs. The estimates are consistent with the model’s
prediction of a positive relationship between zero-sumness α and demotivating beliefs θ.
We then examine the same relationships globally using data from the World Values Survey
(WVS). Although it does not ask about envy or witchcraft, the survey does elicit a broader
set of demotivating beliefs relevant in more developed countries, which comprise most of the
WVS sample. These include the perceived importance of hard work for economic success,
skepticism about the role of effort in determining success, and the acceptability of receiving
helpfromothers. Inlinewiththemodel’spredictions, thereisagainarobustpositiveassociation
between zero-sum perceptions and demotivating beliefs. Thus, although the specific beliefs vary
between the Congolese and WVS samples, in both settings, demotivating beliefs co-move with
the zero-sumness of one’s environment.
The global WVS sample also allows us to test our model’s predictions regarding material
welfare and subjective well-being. Consistent with the model’s predictions, a more zero-sum
environment is associated with lower material welfare, measured using questions about income,
educational attainment, savings, and occupational status. It is also associated with lower subjec-
tive well-being, measured using questions about life satisfaction and happiness.
We then use the global WVS sample to test the model’s prediction that there is an optimal
levelofdemotivatingbeliefwithinafixedzero-sumenvironment,i.e.,thepredictedhump-shaped
relationshipbetweendemotivatingbeliefsandeconomicwelfare. Ourempiricalanalysisconfirms
this prediction: among individuals with the same degree of zero-sum perceptions, those with
an intermediate level of demotivating beliefs have the highest incomes. By contrast, the model
predicts that within a fixed zero-sum environment, subjective well-being is maximized by the
4

true (non-demotivating) belief θ = 0, is strictly convex, and (generally) decreases in θ. We
also find support for this prediction in the WVS data. Among individuals with the same
zero-sum environment, those with stronger demotivating beliefs report lower life satisfaction
and happiness.
Lastly, motivated by Foster’s arguments, we connect demotivating beliefs to long-run growth
byaddingtechnologicalinnovationthroughlearning-by-doingtoourmodel. Wefindthatdemoti-
vatingbeliefscanhaveharmfullong-termconsequencesoninnovation. Whentechnologicalinno-
vation arises from productive effort, demotivating beliefs can trap a society in a low-technology
state by discouraging such effort. Thus, demotivating belief systems can act as a kludge: an
adaptation that compensates for but does not eliminate and even deepens inefficiencies (Ely,
2011
). However, we also show that a temporary decline in the zero-sumness of the environment
cantriggerapermanenttransitionfromalow-toahigh-growthregimebecauseofaculturalshift
to a less demotivating belief system. This dynamic provides potential insights into the cultural
changes that economic historians have argued helped fuel the Industrial Revolution.
In short, by providing a formal theory that builds on Foster’s insights and testing its pre-
dictions, we establish a strong link between an environment’s zero-sumness, the existence of
demotivating beliefs, and economic activity in pre-industrial and industrialized societies.
This paper provides a rare empirical application and test of an evolutionary game-theoretic
model in economics. Whereas much of the existing literature has focused on the evolution of
4
trust and other-regarding preferences, we introduce the notion of a demotivating belief system.
2006
While distorted beliefs also arise in models of motivated reasoning (Bénabou and Tirole, )
2016 2020
and misspecified beliefs (Esponda and Pouzo, , Massari and Newton, ), neither psycho-
logical motivations nor belief misspecification are assumed in our model. Instead, we follow
1987
the literature in economics on the evolution of preferences (or indirect evolution) (Frank, ,
1992 5
Güth and Yaari, ) and show how demotivating beliefs can emerge via cultural evolution. In
2013 2016
particular, we employ the approach of Alger and Weibull ( , ) which relies on positive
assortativity. One particularly novel aspect of our analysis is that we place some structure on the
4 SeethepioneeringworkonculturalevolutionbyBoydandRicherson(1988,2005),aswellastheliteratureonthe
evolutionofcooperationunderculturalgroupselection(e.g.,CooperandWallace,2004,Henrich,2004).
5
The basic analysis assumes that preferences are observable and can thus alter the behavior of one’s partners in
an interaction (Schelling, 1960, Becker, 1976, Frank, 1988). Due to this strategic (commitment) effect, preferences can
diverge from the objective fitness function (Ok and Vega-Redondo, 2001, Ely and Yilankaya, 2001, Heifetz, Shannon
andSpiegel,2007). SeealsoBisinandVerdier(2000,2017)ontheculturaltransmissionofpreferences.
5

divergence between material and subjective payoffs and take these predictions to the data.
Our empirical findings also contribute to an important and growing empirical literature on
2007 2007
intergenerationally transmitted cultural traits (e.g., Giuliano, , Fernandez, , Fernández
2009 2012
and Fogli, , Voigtländer and Voth, ). In particular, our analysis contributes to the
literaturethatseekstoshedlightonhowtheexternalenvironmentaffectstheevolutionofcultural
2011 2016
traits (Nunn and Wantchekon, , Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales, , Grosjean and Khattar,
2018 2019 2021
, Schulz, Bahrami-Rad, Beauchamp and Henrich, , Buggle and Durante, , Giuliano
2021
andNunn, ),aswellasourunderstandingoftheconsequencesoftheseevolvedtraitsforeco-
2009 2009
nomicdevelopment(SpolaoreandWacziarg, ,BeckerandWoessmann, ,Guiso,Sapienza
2009 2010 2019
and Zingales, , Algan and Cahuc, , Enke, , Alesina, Hohmann, Michalopoulos and
2023
Papaioannou, ). We add to this literature an understanding of demotivating beliefs, their
connection to economic environments that are zero-sum in nature, and their consequences for
economic development.
Our belief-based channel contrasts with and complements prior work on social institutions
2013 2017 2020
(e.g., Carvalho, , Nunn and de la Sierra, , Akerlof, Matouschek and Rayo, ). Most
2015 2016 2020
closely related is Gershman’s ( , , ) seminal work on witchcraft and evil-eye beliefs
2015
within economics. Theoretically, Gershman ( ) develops a model in which these beliefs
emergetoreduceanindividual’soutputandtherebydiscourageenviousdestruction. Empirically,
consistent with our findings, he documents a positive relationship between the ‘image of limited
2022
good’ and witchcraft beliefs (Gershman, a) and a negative relationship between witchcraft
2023
beliefs and subjective well-being (Gershman, ). Our findings also speak to work on sharing
2000 2006
norms (Platteau, ). For example, Bowles ( ) shows that sharing norms and other forms
of reproductive leveling favor the evolution of cooperation by reducing the gains from defection.
We show how a seemingly unproductive cultural trait – i.e., demotivating beliefs equivalent to
incorrectbeliefsthatoutputwillbeconfiscatedandburnedratherthanredistributed–canimprove
short-run efficiency and propagate when the economic environment is zero-sum.
Finally, our findings complement the analysis of Chinoy, Nunn, Sequeira and Stantcheva
2023
( ), which shows the importance of Foster’s insights for contemporary U.S. politics. Their
empirical analysis documents relationships between thinking in zero-sum terms and political
views and shows that they explain much of the variation not captured by party affiliation. They
alsodocumentthatpeople’smeasuredperceptionsofthezero-sumnessoftheirworldareshaped
6

in systematic ways by the reality of the environment. They show that economic mobility and
immigration are associated with weaker zero-sum perceptions, while enslavement is associated
withstrongerzero-sumperceptions. Thesefindingsareanimportantbuildingblockforourstudy,
which uses survey-based measures of perceived zero-sumness to capture the true zero-sumness
of the environment.
2. The “Image of Limited Good”
In the introduction, we provided examples of demotivating beliefs. At first glance, it is paradox-
ical that beliefs and value systems that depress productive effort could emerge and survive. To
1967
help elucidate this puzzle, we turn to the work of anthropologist George Foster (Foster, ).
1960
Based on fieldwork in rural Mexico in the s, he argued that people in most pre-industrial
societies viewedthe world aszero-sum. According tothis “image oflimited good,” ifone person
gets ahead, someone else must fall behind.
A zero-sum cognitive orientation arises in a world where essential resources and assets are
indeed in limited supply. Land is limited, so more land for one individual means less land
for another. Similar scarcity applies to romantic partners, authority, and social status. In such
environments, one can only ahead at the expense of others. Although Foster first proposed
the “image of limited good” as a model of rural Mexican society, he subsequently argued that
zero-sum beliefs emerged around the world, driven by the actual zero-sumness of social and
economic life, particularly in pre-industrial societies with limited trade or economic growth
1962 1967 1972
(Foster, , , ). He also described a relationship between a zero-sum world and
1961
demotivating beliefs, noting that zero-sum societies appear to lack what McClelland ( ) calls
1965
the “need for achievement” (Foster, ).
Thepaper’sfirstgoalistocombinetheseinsightsintoaformalmodelthatconnectsazero-sum
world, demotivating beliefs, effort, material welfare, and economic growth. The second is to take
the model and its predictions to the data. In doing so, an important consideration is identifying
and measuring demotivating beliefs. Foster’s writings emphasize envy and supernatural beliefs
like witchcraft and the evil eye, primarily because of his interest in small-scale pre-industrial
societies. Our empirical analysis begins by examining these beliefs, which remain prevalent
across the developing world. We analyze the relationship between perceived zero-sumness of the
environment, indigenous supernatural beliefs, and envy in the DRC. Indigenous supernatural
7

beliefs are commonly labeled “witchcraft” in Western European cultures. One feature of such
beliefsystems,whichcanleadthemtodiscourageeffort,isthatsuccessisoftenthoughttoderive
from the use of witchcraft at the expense of others. Envy is another common demotivating belief
that relates to a zero-sum view of achievement – i.e., the idea that one person’s fortune creates
6
misfortune for another.
The specific content of demotivating beliefs may differ in contemporary post-industrial soci-
eties. But,asnotedintheintroductionwithexamplesfromScandinavia,Australia,NewZealand,
and Japan, many beliefs explicitly discourage personal ambition and success. We use data from
the World Values Survey to examine the relationship between perception of the zero-sumness of
the environment and beliefs that discourage ambition and effort globally.
3. The Model
We now turn to a model that examines the evolution of demotivating beliefs in an environment
that is more or less zero-sum.
A. Basic Set Up
layers
P . The set of players is a continuum of mass one. We view this as a population of
individuals who live in the same environment and can interact with each other. For example, the
population could be a neighborhood within a city, a social group, a village, a district within a
country, or a country. We later extend the analysis to multiple populations.
T ime . Time is continuous and denoted by t ∈ R +.
B elief systems . Thereis a potentiallylarge butfinite setof beliefsystems Θ = {θ ,θ ,...,θ },
1 2 n
where the intensity of belief i is θ ∈ [0,1], i = 1,2,...,n. As we shall see, θ = 0 is the true belief,
i i
and any θ > 0 is a demotivating belief. We view these as cultural beliefs rather than the more
i
conventional notion of beliefs as probability distributions over known states of the world. The
share of each belief type i in the population is denoted by q , with the population state denoted
i
by q = (q ,q ,...,q ) and ∑n q = 1.
1 2 n i=1 i
6
Envycanalsofueltheuseofwitchcraft. Indeed,envyhasbeenassociatedwithharm,eitherthroughintentional
(witchcraft)orunintentional(evileye)supernaturalmeans.
8

A ctions . Individuals are paired and engage in production. The effort exerted by type i is
√
denoted by x
i
∈ R +. The cost of production is
2
1x
i
, and the production function is A x
i
, where
A > 0 is the state of technology in the economy (which we endogenize in Section 6 ).
Environments vary in their degree of rivalry or zero-sumness. The degree to which the
environment is zero-sum is measured by α ∈ (0,1], which we assume is known by individuals.
One interpretation is that a fraction α of tasks are zero-sum in nature, meaning that the benefit
to the individual undertaking the task comes at the expense of the player with whom they are
7
paired. For example, if player i invests in better marketing for her shop, an increase in sales can
come from newly created demand or stealing of player j’s customers.
P ayoffs . The true (objective) payoff function to type i when matched with type j is
(cid:2) (cid:0) √ √ (cid:1) √ (cid:3)
U(x ,x ) = A α x − x +(1−α) x − 1x
i j i j i 2 i
= A (cid:2) √ x −α √ x (cid:3) − 1x . ( 1 )
i j 2 i
If α = 0, we have a simple production decision: each individual’s payoff is independent of
theirpartner’seffort. Ifα = 1,theenvironmentispurelyzero-sum: allgainscomeattheexpense
1965
of one’s partner. This is what Foster ( ) describes as a “limited good” environment.
Playersmaximizeapotentiallydistortedversionofthetruepayofffunction. Specifically,atype
i player chooses production effort x to maximize the following subjective payoff:
i
Uˆ (x ,x ) = A (cid:2) (1−θ ) √ x −α √ x (cid:3) − 1x . ( 2 )
i i j i i j 2 i
That is, an individual with belief system i discounts the return to her effort by a factor
(1−θ ) ∈ [0,1]. Our results are robust to alternative specifications of the subjective payoff
i
function, e.g., beliefs that overestimate the cost of effort or discount the value of total output
(see Appendix B.I). This specification captures various kinds of demotivating belief systems. For
example, individuals may have a (potentially inaccurate) perception about the economic return
to effort in the economy (Bénabou and Tirole, 2006 ). θ > 0 could also be the product of a
i
supernatural belief, such as belief in the evil eye, according to which envious individuals cause
2014 2015
harm to others through supernatural forces (Gershman, , ). Hence, envy exacts a kind
of supernatural tax on effort, with believers expecting to lose a fraction θ of their output. These
i
7 Analternativeincomplete-informationinterpretationisthattheenvironmentiszero-sumwithprobabilityα. In
this case, whatever type i gains through production, their partner j loses. With probability 1−α, i’s effort is fully
productiveanddoesnotcomeattheexpenseofj.
9

beliefsystemsreduceperceivedreturnstoeffortandarethusdemotivating. Thehigherthebelief
intensity θ , the more demotivating the belief of individual i.
i
Maximizing ( 2 ) with respect to x , we get optimal production effort for each type i: 8
i
x∗ = arg max Uˆ (x ,x ) = (1−θ )2A2. ( 3 )
i i i j i
xi ∈R +
atch ayoffs 1992
M P . As in the literature on indirect evolution (e.g., Güth and Yaari, , Ok
2001
and Vega-Redondo, ), while individual choices are based on their subjective payoff functions
2 1 9
given by ( ), evolution is determined by the true payoff function ( ). Denote the equilibrium
(true) payoff to a type i individual matched with a type j individual by
U = U(x∗ ,x∗)
ij i j
= (cid:0) 1−θ −α(1−θ )− 1(1−θ )2(cid:1) A2.
i j 2 i
By observation, the payoff to i in an i,j match is strictly decreasing in the intensity of i’s belief
θ andstrictlyincreasingintheintensityofj’sbeliefθ . Therefore,onewouldideallywishtohold
i j
the true belief θ = 0, but be matched with individuals who hold a demotivating belief θ > 0.
i j
A ssortative M atching . The success of trait i is based on its “cultural fitness,” which we
denote by F (q), and is given by the expected payoff across all possible matches; it is, thus, a
i
function of the population state q. We assume partial assortative matching as in Cavalli-Sforza
and Feldman ( 1981 ). Specifically, we introduce a degree of positive assortativity σ such that a
fractionσ ofthepopulationmatcheswithitstypeandafraction1−σ ismatchedatrandomwith
anothermemberofthepopulation. Inmanybiologicalmodels,positiveassortativityisgenerated
by a “limited dispersal,” i.e., a spatial structure to reproduction in which genetic/cultural off-
spring occupy neighboring locations so that interactions are more likely among genetic/cultural
1964 2007 10
relatives (e.g., Hamilton, , West, Griffin and Gardner, ). Another interpretation is that
σ is a proxy for group-level selection in the population. For example, consider the population
being split into two groups, labeled 1 and 2 . Suppose trait i has achieved fixation (i.e., is present
in 100 % of the population) in group 1 and trait j has achieved fixation in group 2 . The index of
assortativity σ is then the likelihood of a within-population match.
8 Since i’s marginal utility is independent of j’s choice, the results do not depend on whether individuals have
completeorincompleteinformationregardingtheirpartner’stype.
9
Ourresultsarepreservedwhenthefitnessfunctionisaconvexcombinationofmaterialandsubjectivepayoffs.
10
Positive assortativity could also be generated by social institutions, e.g., groups that select for specific traits or
ritualsthatscreenoutnon-believers(e.g.,Iannaccone,1992,CarvalhoandSacks,2021a).
10

Given an index of assortativity σ, the cultural fitness of trait i is
n
∑
F
i
(q) = σU
ii
+(1−σ) q
j
U
ij
j=1
(cid:16) (cid:17) n
= (1−θ
i
) 1−
2
1(1−θ
i
) A2−σα(1−θ
i
)A2−(1−σ)αA2 ∑ q
j
(1−θ
j
). (4)
j=1
B. Cultural Evolution
The evolution of beliefs in the population is given by a dynamic system operating on the n-
dimensionalunitsimplex. Weplaceaminimalrestrictionthatthedistributionofbeliefsqevolves
according to a deterministic payoff monotone dynamic: for all i,j such that q > 0 and q > 0,
i j
> dq i > dq j
F i (q) = F j (q) ⇐⇒ = .
< dt < dt
That is, if the payoff to type i is higher than the payoff to type j, then i’s population share
grows faster. A leading example is the replicator dynamic, which can be the product of natural
2010
selection, imitation, or reinforcement learning (Sandholm, ).
Wefirstshowthatthebeliefintensitywiththehighestculturalfitnessvis-à-visanyotherbelief
intensity is θ∗ = σα, i.e., the product of the degree of positive sorting in interactions and the
degree to which the environment is zero-sum. Recall that the (true) non-demotivating belief is
θ = 0. We denote the population shares of these beliefs at time t by q∗(t) and q0(t), respectively.
Proposition 1 . Evolution of Demotivating Beliefs. Cultural evolution selects a belief system as
follows. If there is a belief close to θ∗ = σα, then the true belief θ = 0 will be driven to extinction, and all
individuals will have a ‘distorted’ view of the world. If θ∗ is in the set of beliefs, then eventually, the entire
population will hold this belief. Formally:
(i) If the set of beliefs Θ contains θ < 2σα and the initial state is such that q0(0) < 1, then q0(t)
i
converges monotonically to zero. Otherwise, lim t→∞q0(t) = 1.
(ii) If the set of beliefs Θ contains θ∗ = σα and the initial state is such that q∗(0) > 0, then q∗(t)
converges monotonically to one.
All proofs are in Appendix A.
Even though they represent inaccurate representations of the world, demotivating belief sys-
tems can survive and spread through the population. According to part (i) of the proposition,
11

as long as demotivating beliefs are present initially and are not too intense given the degree
of zero-sumness α > 0 and index of assortativity σ > 0, the true belief θ = 0 will be driven
to extinction. Only demotivating beliefs will survive in the population. Part (ii) tells us that
the demotivating belief with intensity θ∗ = σα will win out, driving all other belief systems to
extinction. Hence, under positive assortativity (σ > 0), the belief intensity that is selected is
11
strictly increasing in the degree of zero-sumness α. These results do not depend on the specific
form of the payoff monotone cultural dynamic. In addition, even when q∗(0) = 0, Corollary
2 in Appendix A shows that evolution will select a belief intensity in support of q(0) that is
approximately equal to θ∗.
The intuition for the survival of (incorrect) demotivating beliefs is as follows. The belief θ > 0
depresses effort below the first-best level by discounting the return to effort. The direct effect of
this distortion is to reduce cultural fitness. There is also an indirect effect we call the ‘interactive
effect,’ which is an increase in the likelihood of being matched with someone with demotivating
beliefsandwhoexertslittleeffort. Wheninteractionsareprimarilyzero-sum(αislarge)andthere
isahighdegreeofassortativematching(σislarge),theinteractiveeffectdominates. Demotivating
beliefs evolve to internalize part of the negative externalities in such environments.
These results are connected to Alger and Weibull’s work on Homo moralis and altruistic
2012
preferences (Alger and Weibull, ). It can be shown that the same effort choices are generated
by these approaches. This equivalence is interesting from a theoretical perspective. From an
empirical perspective, we need to identify the specific belief systems or preferences at work.
In Appendix B.II, we show that demotivating beliefs generate distinct empirical predictions from
12
altruisticpreferences. InAppendixB.III,wealsoshowthatourresultsarerobusttotheinclusion
of different types of effort, i.e., pro-social and anti-social, with demotivation only occurring with
respect to the latter. Finally, in Appendix B.IV, we show that the same results occur when
demotivating beliefs are driven in a top-down manner by a cultural leader or institution that
tunes the intensity of demotivation over time to maximize the spread of the demotivating belief.
11 Thisresulthelpsusunderstandpart(i). The(true)non-demotivatingbeliefθ=0isdriventoextinctionwhenever
thereisademotivatingbeliefthatiscloserthanittotherelativefitnessmaximizingbeliefθ∗ =σα.
12
In particular, the evolutionarily stable demotivating belief depends on the degree to which the environment is
zero-sum. Theevolutionarilystabledegreeofaltruismdoesnot. Ifsurveyresponsessuchas“competitionisnotgood”
onlyreflectaltruism,thentheyshouldnotvarywithzero-sumness,whichcontradictsourempiricalresults.
12

C. The Effect of Demotivating Beliefs on Material Welfare and Subjective Well-Being
We have seen that demotivating beliefs have an ‘interactive effect’ at the individual level that
enables them to spread through the population. We now turn to the social efficiency of such
beliefs. Ourefficiencycriterion,whichwerefertoasmaterialwelfare,isafunctionoftheobjective
payoffs,whichserveastheculturalfitnessofeachbelief. Specifically,materialwelfareattimetfor
apersonholdingbeliefθ istheobjective(ortrue)payoffgivenby( 1 )evaluatedattheequilibrium
i
effort levels (x∗)n and averaged over all interactions:
i i=1
(cid:34) (cid:35)
n
W (t) = F (q(t)) = σU(x∗ ,x∗)+(1−σ) ∑ q (t)U(x∗ ,x∗) . ( 5 )
i i i i j i j
j=1
Proposition 2 . Demotivating Beliefs and Material Welfare. Material welfare at time t is highest for
the holders of belief θ∗ = σα and strictly concave in θ.
The demotivating belief θ∗ improves welfare by internalizing the negative externalities from
production in zero-sum environments. In addition, there is a hump-shaped relationship between
materialwelfareandtheintensityofdemotivatingbeliefs. Inotherwords,thereisademotivating
belief that maximizes i’s material welfare. This holds regardless of the initial condition q(0).
We can also examine the effect of demotivating beliefs on perceived welfare, which we refer
to as “subjective well-being.” Let us define subjective well-being at time t for a person holding
beliefθ asthesubjectivepayoffgivenby( 2 )evaluatedattheequilibriumeffortlevels (x∗)n and
i i i=1
averaged over all interactions:
(cid:34) (cid:35)
n
Wˆ (t) = σUˆ (x∗ ,x∗)+(1−σ) ∑ q (t)Uˆ (x∗ ,x∗) . ( 6 )
i i i i j i i j
j=1
Proposition 3 . Demotivating Beliefs and Subjective Well-Being. Subjective well-being at time t is
strictlydecreasingintheintensityofdemotivatingbeliefsθifθ < 1−σα. Otherwise,itisincreasinginthe
intensity of demotivating beliefs. Subjective well-being is also strictly convex in θ. Finally, for σα < 1/2,
subjective well-being is highest for the true belief θ = 0.
Unlike material welfare, which is hump-shaped in the intensity of demotivating beliefs, sub-
jective well-being is strictly decreasing in θ if the most intense demotivating belief in the set of
beliefs is not too intense, specifically if maxΘ ≤ 1−σα. Otherwise, subjective well-being is
13

U-shaped in the intensity of demotivating beliefs, increasing for higher values of θ. Even when
maxΘ > 1−σα, numerical examples indicate that subjective well-being only rises slightly for
higher values of θ, even for high degrees of positive sorting (see Figure A 1 ). Regardless of the
shape of the function, subjective well-being is largest for the true non-demotivating belief θ = 0.
This is true as long as σ < 1, a condition that we expect to hold. For example, in the case of
2
genetic evolution, σ = 1 means that all interactions are with siblings, which is an extreme level
2
of positive sorting. Thus, subjective well-being contrasts with material welfare, which we have
shown is maximized at θ∗ > 0 (for σα > 0).
The reason why demotivating beliefs have a different effect on material welfare and subjective
well-being is as follows. Material welfare is hump-shaped in θ due to the tradeoff between the
direct cost of a distorted belief system and the interactive benefit of being matched with a less
motivated partner. There is no such tradeoff for subjective well-being since individuals choose
effort to maximize their subjective payoff. Instead, there is an “affective cost” from discounting
the material payoff by 1−θ, i.e., making people feel they are doing worse than they actually are.
This affective cost is hump-shaped in θ, causing subjective well-being to be typically decreasing
in θ. Thus, Propositions 2 and 3 predict a divergence between material welfare and subjective
well-being. These are key predictions that we will take to the data.
D. Comparative Dynamics across Populations
Thus far, we have considered a population interacting in an environment characterized by a
degree of zero-sumness α. In reality, even within a given society, there can be multiple so-
cioeconomic and geographic niches with different degrees of zero-sumness. We now generate
predictions for pooled populations of individuals interacting in environments with different
degrees of zero-sumness, which we will also take to the data.
Consider a finite set of populations indexed by k ∈ {1,2,...,K}. The degree to which the
environment faced by population k is zero-sum is αk, and the populations are ordered such that
k > k′ implies αk > αk′ . In order to focus on the degree of zero-sumness αk, we assume each
13
population has the same index of assortativity σ > 0 and set of beliefs Θ.
13 Weassumeunchangingαk. Ifweweretoallowtheenvironmenttochange,allresultswouldapplyregardlessof
thehistoryofαk ineachpopulation,aslongasenoughtimehaspassedsincethelastenvironmentalchange.
14

We begin by analyzing the relationship between zero-sumness, on the one hand, and demoti-
vating beliefs, effort, material welfare, and subjective well-being, on the other, across populations
k ∈ K. Define the population k share of belief i at time t by qk(t) and the population k state
i
by qk(t). The mean demotivating belief, mean level of effort, mean material welfare, and mean
subjective well-being in population k at time t are defined, respectively, as:
n n n n
θk(t) = ∑ qk(t)θ , Xk(t) = ∑ qk(t)x∗ , Wk(t) = ∑ qk(t)W (t), Wˆ k(t) = ∑ qk(t)Wˆ (t) ( 7 )
i i i i i i i i
i=1 i=1 i=1 i=1
where x∗ is given by ( 3 ), W (t) is given by ( 5 ), and Wˆ (t) is given by ( 6 ). If we also assume a
i i i
(cid:8) (cid:9)
regular environment where the set of beliefs is the discrete grid Θ = 0, 1, 2,...1 and the initial
∆ ∆
state q(0) has full support on Θ, we can then state the following proposition:
Proposition 4 . Zero-Sum Environments, Demotivating Beliefs, and Economic Outcomes. Con-
sider a regular environment with a sufficiently fine set of beliefs (∆ large). If cultural evolution is allowed
enough time to operate, the mean demotivating belief will be higher in populations with higher degrees of
zero-sumness, and mean effort and material welfare will be lower. If, in addition, σ ≤ 1 or αK ≤ 11+σ,
2 σ2+σ
then mean subjective well-being will also be lower in populations with higher degrees of zero-sumness.
That is, under the conditions above, there exists a finite time T such that for all t ≥ T, θk(t) is strictly
increasing in αk and Xk(t), Wk(t) and Wˆ k(t) are strictly decreasing in αk .
Therefore, where a population interacts in a more zero-sum environment, it will eventually
hold more intense demotivating beliefs, exert less effort, and experience lower material welfare
and subjective well-being. Hence, worse outcomes are produced in more zero-sum environments
due to the evolution of demotivating beliefs. Again, this applies independently of the precise
form of payoff monotone cultural dynamic or of the initial conditions for each population, as
long as they are interior.
The reason behind the additional condition for subjective well-being is as follows. There are
three effects of a more zero-sum environment on subjective well-being. The first is to increase
negative externalities and thereby lower subjective well-being. The remaining two effects depend
on the limiting demotivating belief, θ∗ = σαk, being increasing in zero-sumness. Specifically,
the second effect arises because increased demotivating beliefs discount the returns to effort by
approximately 1−θ∗, which reduces well-being by making an individual’s situation seem worse
than it is. The third effect raises well-being by producing demotivating beliefs that internalize
15

part of the negative externalities from zero-sum interactions. When positive assortativity σ and
thedegreeofzero-sumnessαk arelarge,thethirdeffectdominates,andsubjectivewell-beingcan
rise with αk. Empirically, this is unlikely because σ = 1 is a very high degree of positive sorting.
2
Moreover, numerical examples indicate that Wˆ k only increases slightly with αk and on a small
part of the domain (see Figure A 2 ). Essentially, αk becomes close to flat for high values of αk.
Taken together, these results also yield relationships between demotivating beliefs, economic
outcomes, and subjective well-being across populations.
Corollary 1 . Demotivating Beliefs, Economic Outcomes, and Subjective Well-being. Mean effort,
material welfare, and subjective well-being are all strictly decreasing in a population’s mean demotivating
belief. Specifically, under the conditions of Proposition 4, there exists a finite time T such that, for all
t ≥ T, θk(t) > θk′(t) implies Xk(t) < Xk′(t), Wk(t) < Wk′(t), and Wˆ k(t) < Wˆ k′(t).
The theory thus generates a subtle but important point: within a society characterized by a
given degree of zero-sumness, demotivating beliefs can increase material welfare (Proposition
2
). However, across societies with varying degrees of zero-sumness, demotivating beliefs are
1
associated with lower material welfare (Corollary ). This is due to the variation in zero-sumness
across populations, leading to more intense demotivating beliefs and lower material welfare.
Summary of the Theoretical Predictions
2 3
We now take the primary predictions from our theory to the data. Propositions and con-
cern the effect of demotivating beliefs holding constant the zero-sumness of the environment.
They predict a divergence between material welfare and subjective well-being: although an
intermediate demotivating belief maximizes income, happiness is maximized by the true (non-
demotivating) belief θ = 0.
4
Proposition examines variation across environments with varying degrees of zero-sumness.
It predicts that demotivating beliefs are increasing in the underlying degree of zero-sumness of
the environment. The proposition also connects zero-sumness to reduced effort, lower levels of
1
material welfare, and worse subjective well-being. Corollary shows that demotivating beliefs
are also associated with lower levels of effort, material welfare, and subjective well-being.
Lastly, we can show that if an individual changes environment, their demotivating beliefs will
reflect both the zero-sumness of their current and historical environment. The reason is that
16

cultural evolution is a relatively slow-moving process, often transpiring over generations. We
return to this point in the implementation of the empirical analysis.
4. Testing the Model in the Developing World: Evidence from the DRC
A. Data Collection
Our empirical analysis first studies two samples from Kananga in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (DRC). The city is the capital of the Kasaï-Central province and has a population of
18 2015 200
roughly . million. Thefirstsample,from ,includesabout individuals,whilethesecond
2019 1000
sample,from ,includesabout , individuals. Respondentswerechosenrandomly,subject
to inclusion criteria to ensure sufficient spread across ethnic groups. The surveys took place
face-to-faceattherespondent’sresidence. Weusethefirst,smallersampletodevelopandvalidate
our measures of the zero-sumness of the environment and to provide exploratory evidence on
4
the relationship with demotivating beliefs (Proposition ). We then replicate the findings in the
second, larger sample. Details on the surveys and sampling are provided in Appendix E.
B. Measuring a Zero-Sum World
Central to our analysis is the extent to which the world is zero-sum, α. Because we cannot
directly measure the zero-sumness of each respondent’s environment, we measure perceptions
of its zero-sumness. Perceived α is an imperfect measure. Conceptually, this is not a problem
because our theoretical results remain unchanged if we allow individuals to form biased beliefs
about the zero-sumness of their environment. Indeed, demotivating beliefs are shaped through a
dynamicprocessoperatingonthetrueα, andindividuals’(mis)perceptionsofα donotinfluence
this process. Thus, the only issue is empirical, namely, the extent to which perceptions of zero-
sumnessreflectreality. Fortunately,thereisampleevidenceconfirmingthatzero-sumperceptions
are shaped by how zero-sum the world truly is. For example, in the United States, zero-sum
perceptions are strongly correlated with characteristics of the environment that shape its zero-
sumness, including economic growth, intergenerational mobility, immigration, and enslavement
2023
(Chinoy et al., ). We also validate this relationship in our empirical setting in Section C.
17

We measure respondents’ perceived α using six survey questions that ask the extent to which
they believe that the gains achieved by an individual or group come at the expense of others.
Each question asks respondents how much they agree with one of two contrasting statements.
• Statement1: InKananga,peopleonlymakemoneywhenotherslosemoney.
Statement2: InKananga,nooneneedstolosemoneyforotherstomakemoney.
• Statement1: InKananga,businessesonlymakemoneywhenotherslosemoney.
Statement2: InKananga,nooneneedstolosemoneyforbusinessestomakemoney.
• Statement1: Ifonepersoninavillagegetsverywealthy,otherpeopleinthevillagewillbecomepoorer.
Statement 2: If one person in a village gets very wealthy, other people in the village will not necessarily
becomepoorer.
• Statement1: Intrade,ifonepartygains,theotherpartyloses.
Statement2: Intrade,itispossibleforbothpartiestogainatthesametime.
• Statement1: Apersoncanonlygainpowerbytakingitawayfromothers.
Statement2: Apersoncangainpowerwithouttakingitawayfromothers.
• Statement1: Gaininghappinessrequirestakingitawayfromothers.
Statement2: Itispossibleforeveryonetobehappy.
1
The potential response options are: “agree strongly with statement ,” “agree with statement
1 2 2
,” “agree with statement ,” or “agree strongly with statement .” For each survey question,
1 4
we create a variable that takes on an integer value from – , increasing in how zero-sum the
choice of the respondent is. We then use principal component analysis (PCA) to create an index
34
of zero-sumness based on the first principal component (capturing % of the variance in the
200 36 1000
-person sample and % in the , -person sample).
1
Table reports the estimated weights for the first principal component. In both samples, all
1 2
six variables load positively and have estimates that are similar in magnitude (columns and ).
These facts are informative. Ex ante, it is not clear whether there is a generalized perception – or
“worldview” as Foster puts it – of zero-sumness that applies similarly to income, wealth, trade,
power,andhappiness,andtolifeinKanangaandinthevillage. ThesimilarPCAweightssuggest
14
a shared zero-sum view of the world across different domains and settings.
200
In the -person sample, we asked additional zero-sum questions, adding different scenarios
(e.g, farming) and asking zero-sum relationships using more diverse language (e.g., “created”
vs. “taking from others”; “exploiting others” vs. “without exploiting”; “helps people” vs. “hurts
people”). The additional four questions are:
14
It might seem surprising that happiness is perceived as zero-sum since everyone can be happy. However, if
happiness is derived from prestige, power, income, and wealth, which are also zero-sum, one might also view
happinessaszero-sum. ThisfindingaccordswithFoster’snotionof“limitedgood”inpre-industrialsocieties.
18

Table1: PrincipalComponentAnalysisforZero-Sumindices
(1) (2) (3) (4)
6questionindex 6questionindex 10questionindex 12questionindex
Zero-sumsurveyquestions
(200sample) (1,000sample) (200sample) (200sample)
1.InKananga,peopleonlymakemoneywhenotherslosemoney 0.467 0.469 0.434 0.392
2.InKananga,nooneneedlosemoneyforotherstomakemoney
1.InKananga,businessesonlymakemoneywhenotherslosemoney 0.400 0.471 0.381 0.368
2.InKananga,nooneneedlosemoneyforbusinessestomakemoney
1.Ifonepersoninavillagegetsverywealthy,otherpeopleinthevillagewillbecomepoorer 0.320 0.378 0.306 0.240
2.Ifonepersoninavillagegetsverywealthy,otherpeopleinthevillagewillnotnecessarilybecomepoorer
1.Intrade,ifonepartygainstheotherpartyloses 0.325 0.413 0.289 0.229
2.Intrade,itispossibleforbothpartiestogainatthesametime
1.Apersoncanonlygainpowerbytakingitawayfromothers 0.453 0.362 0.451 0.434
2.Apersoncangainpowerwithouttakingitawayfromothers
1.Gaininghappinessrequirestakingitawayfromothers 0.456 0.336 0.436 0.426
2.Itispossibleforeveryonetobehappy
1.Ifonefarmerhasaverylargecrop,hisneighborislikelytoalsohaveaverylargecrop 0.277 0.302
2.Ifonefarmerhasaverylargecrop,hisneighborislikelytohaveasmallcrop
1.Thesuccessofthewealthygenerallyhelpsotherpeopleinthecommunity 0.127 0.216
2.Thesuccessofthewealthygenerallyhurtsotherpeopleinthecommunity
1.Mostwealthiscreatedwithoutexploitingothers 0.049 0.135
2.Mostwealthisobtainedbyexploitingothers
1.Mostofthewealthoftherichwascreatedwithouttakingitfromothers -0.032 0.009
2.Mostofthewealthoftherichwasobtainedbytakingitfromothers
1.IfGodislookingoutformybrother,Heislesslikelytobelookingoutforme 0.258
2.IfGodislookingoutformybrother,Heismorelikelytoalsobelookingoutforme
1.Ifmyancestors’spiritsarelookingoutformybrother,theyarelesslikelytobelookingoutforme 0.093
2.Ifmyancestors’spiritsarelookingoutformybrother,theyaremorelikelytoalsobelookingoutforme
Eigenvalue 2.067 2.169 2.209 2.272
Proportionofvarianceexplained 0.345 0.362 0.221 0.189
Observations 205 984 193 163
Notes:Thetablereportstheestimatedfactorloadingsfromfourprincipalcomponentanalyses.Eachsetofestimatesisreportedinonecolumn,withtheeigenvalueofthefirst
principalcomponentreportedinthebottompanel. Thequestionsusedintheprincipalcomponentanalysesarerespondents’self-reportedperceptionsofhowzero-sumthe
worldis,andrespondentschoosefromoneoffouroptions:“agreestronglywithstatement1,”“agreewithstatement1,”“agreewithstatement2,”and“agreestronglywith
statement2.”Columns1and2reportthefactorloadingsfromthefirstprincipalcomponentusingthesetofsixsurveyquestionswiththe200-personpersonand1,000-person
samples,respectively.Columns3and4reportthefactorloadingsofthefirstprincipalcomponentusingthesetof10and12questionsforthe200-personsample.
• Statement1: Ifonefarmerhasaverylargecrop,hisneighborislikelytoalsohaveaverylargecrop.
Statement2: Ifonefarmerhasaverylargecrop,hisneighborislikelytohaveasmallcrop.
• Statement1: Thesuccessofthewealthygenerallyhelpsotherpeopleinthecommunity.
Statement2: Thesuccessofthewealthygenerallyhurtsotherpeopleinthecommunity.
• Statement1: Mostwealthiscreatedwithoutexploitingothers.
Statement2: Mostwealthisobtainedbyexploitingothers.
• Statement1: Mostofthewealthoftherichwascreatedwithouttakingitfromothers.
Statement2: Mostofthewealthoftherichwasobtainedbytakingitfromothers.
We create another measure of zero-sum views that adds these four questions. The PCA
3 1 15
estimatesarereportedincolumn ofTable . Thevariablesmostlyloadinanexpectedmanner.
Lastly, we also add two questions about specific but important domains in this setting; namely,
benefits that arise due to blessings from God or from one’s ancestors.
• Statement1: IfGodislookingoutformybrother,heislesslikelytobelookingoutforme.
Statement2: IfGodislookingoutformybrother,heismorelikelytoalsobelookingoutforme.
15
Thefactorloadingsareveryclosetozeroforthewealthquestion,whichusesthephrase“created”versus“taking
from others” and the question that uses the phrase “exploiting.” This suggests that, consistent with Foster, people
don’tliterallyviewaperson’swealthasbeingstolenorexploitedbyothers. Instead,thelargersystemcreatesaworld
with“limitedgood”thatiszero-sum.
19

Figure 1: Correlation Plots of the Zero-Sum Indices based on 6 , 10 , and 12 Survey Questions
(a)6vs.10QuestionIndex (b)6vs.12QuestionIndex (c)10vs.12QuestionIndex
Notes: Thefigurereportsthebivariaterelationshipsbetweenthezero-sumindices, constructedasthefirstprincipalcomponentof
6,10,or12surveyquestions,eachnormalizedtoliebetweenzeroandone. panel(a)reportsthecorrelationbetweenthezero-sum
indicesbasedon6and10questions, panel(b)reportsthecorrelationbetweenthezero-sumindicesbasedon6and12questions,
andpanel(c)reportsthecorrelationbetweenthezero-sumindicesbasedon10and12questions. Eachpanelreportsthecorrelation
coefficientforthecorrespondingbivariaterelationshipbetweenthezero-sumindices.
• Statement1: Ifmyancestors’spiritsarelookingoutformybrother,theyarelesslikelytolookoutforme.
Statement2: Ifmyancestors’spiritsarelookingoutformybrother,theyaremorelikelytolookoutforme.
Thefactorloadspositivelyontobothquestionsandmoststronglyonthequestionthatasksabout
1 4
‘God’ than on the question that asks about ancestors (Table , column ).
1
Figure shows the bivariate relationships between the three zero-sum measures based on six,
ten, or twelve questions. As shown, they are very highly correlated with correlation coefficients
093 098 6
thatrangefrom . to . . Allofthefindingswereportusingourbaseline -questionzero-sum
10 12
index are very similar if we use the - or -question indices.
C. Validating the Zero-Sum Indices
Althoughitisreassuringthatthezero-sumsurveyquestionsaboutdifferentoutcomes(happiness,
power, gains from trade, income, wealth, crop yields) and different parties (individuals/people,
tradingparties,villagers,farmers,citizensinKananga,andbusinessesinKananga)arecorrelated
with one another, we undertake several additional tests to validate the link between perceived
zero-sumness and actual zero-sumness.
First,wecompareoursurveymeasurestoarevealedmeasureofwhetherindividualsviewthe
200 16
worldaszero-sum. Inthe -personsample,wepresentedrespondentswithseveralvignettes.
Each vignette uses an image to help explain the situation. In one scenario, shown in Figure
4
D a, the respondent is asked about two women, Kapinga and Tshilomba, who sell bananas. On
16
SeeAppendixE.IIIforthefulltext.
20

1 10 20 2 20
day , Kapinga sells bananas, and Tshilomba sells . On day , Kapinga sells bananas.
2
The respondents were then asked how many bananas they thought Tshilomba sold on day .
10 40
They can choose either or . If one perceived sales as zero-sum, then it would be natural
10
to believe that Tshilomba sold bananas. If one believed that sales were not zero-sum, then
100
a logical assumption is that there was a demand shock, and everyone sold % more than the
40
previous day, so Tshilomba would have sold bananas. The second vignette, shown in Figure
4
D b, presents an analogous scenario where two farmers cultivate corn. Comparing responses to
the vignette questions with the zero-sum indices described above confirms that individuals who
chose the zero-sum vignette response have a significantly higher zero-sum index when using the
6 4 4 10 12 5 5
-question index (Figures D c and D d) or the - or -question index (Figures D a and D b
6 6
and Figures D a and D b).
The second check examines the relationship between zero-sum perceptions and factors that
200
are expected to influence the zero-sumness of the environment. In the -person survey, we
collected data on the employment history of the respondent and their family. Motivated by
Foster’s observation that pre-industrial economic occupations, namely farming, were more zero-
17
sum than employment in modern sectors, we check whether households with recent formal
employment – relative to agriculture or unemployment – perceive the world as being less zero-
1
sum. We create an index of employment that takes on the following values: ( ) unemployed,
2 3 18 1
( ) farmer, or ( ) formal paid employment. The estimates, which are reported in Table C ,
confirm a negative association between employment, particularly in modern sectors, and zero-
19
sum perceptions. Thus, zero-sum perceptions appear to be associated with the zero-sumness
of the environment. Given concerns about the endogeneity of memories of employment and a
person’s zero-sum perceptions, we also examine the relationship between rainfall in a person’s
origin village – a boon for farmers who would have faced a less zero-sum environment – during
20 30
the first (and years) of their life. We again confirm that respondents with this rainier,
2
less-zero-sum past view the world as less zero-sum (Table C ).
17
Foster writes “additional hard work in village productive enterprises simply does not produce a significant
incrementinincome... Itisnotgoingtoofartosaythatinagriculturethereisnowayreallytogetahead...Tobecome
richonemustleaveagriculture.” (Foster,1965,p.307).
18
ThefinerdetailsoftheestimatesarereportedinAppendixC.
19
Whilerespondents’ownhistoryofemploymentpredictszero-sumperceptions,theassociationisalsoverystrong
fortherespondent’sparents’employmentorwhenweexamineacombinedmeasure.
21

D. Estimating Equations and Regression Estimates
4
WenowexploreProposition andexaminetherelationshipbetweenthezero-sumindexandtwo
demotivating beliefs: envy and beliefs in witchcraft.
200
In the model, we do not take a stand on the definition of a group. Since our samples are
1000 18
or , peopledrawnfromatotalpopulationof . million, ourstartingassumptionisthat each
observation is drawn from a different “group” in the city. This assumption aligns with the rich
variation we observe in individuals’ perceptions of the zero-sumness of the world. We therefore
estimate the following individual-level equation:
y = α +βZeroSum +X Ω+ϵ , ( 8 )
i e(i) i i i
where i indexes individuals. The dependent variable y captures one of our demotivating
i
beliefs of interest, either envy or indigenous religious beliefs. α denote ethnicity fixed effects.
e(i)
The vector X includes demographic controls for age, age squared, a gender indicator, and its
i
interaction with age and age squared. Our baseline estimates use robust standard errors, but to
account for the possibility that multiple observations might be drawn from the same group k, we
also report estimates that allow for various forms of non-independence of observations in Table
7
D . As hypothesized by Foster and predicted by our theory, we expect a more zero-sum view of
the world to be associated with more envy and stronger indigenous witchcraft beliefs: β > 0.
2 8 200 1000
Table reports the estimates of equation ( ) using the -person (panel A) and , -person
20
(panelB)samples. Ourfirstoutcomeisenvy,whichwemeasureasthefirstprincipalcomponent
21
of four survey questions. The first three questions ask about experiencing frustration when
people succeed in life easily, resentment when neighbors are successful, or feelings of injustice
when some people seem highly talented. The fourth question asks if the respondent sometimes
22
wishes that rich and powerful people lose their advantage. We find a positive and statistically
significant relationship between zero-sum and envy in both samples, and this relationship is
1 2
robust to controlling for covariates (column ) and ethnicity fixed effects (column ). The
20 AswereportinTablesD8andD9,therelationshipbetweenzero-sumperceptionsandenvy,beliefsinwitchcraft,
andbeliefsinChristianityareofsimilarmagnitudeandsignificancewhenweusethealternativezero-sumindicesthat
arebasedonthetenortwelvesurveyquestionsavailableinthe200-personsampleandintroducedinSection4.B.
21
TheprecisewordingofeachquestionisprovidedinAppendixE.I,andthefactorloadingsforthefirstprincipal
componentarereportedinTableD4.
22
These variables measure respondents’ envy rather than their about the envy of others. We rely on the fact that
aprimarydeterminantofpeople’sbeliefaboutothers’behavioristheirownbehavior. Thus, wetakearespondent’s
ownfeelingsofenvyasaproxyfortheirperceivedenvyofothers.
22

magnitude of the estimates is also meaningful. A one standard deviation increase in zero-sum
041 020 1
perceptions is associated with a . - . standard deviation increase in envy (column ).
Wethenturntotherelationshipbetweenzero-sumperceptionsandtraditionalreligiousbeliefs.
3 4
The outcome in columns and is the intensity of witchcraft beliefs, measured as the first prin-
cipal component of four questions about the strength of belief in traditional religion, frequency
of prayer to ancestors, frequency of participation in rituals devoted to ancestors, and how close
23
theyfeeltonon-ChristianswholiveinKananga. Thereisastrongpositiverelationshipbetween
200
zero-sum perceptions and witchcraft beliefs in the -person sample and a weaker one in the
1000 4
, -person sample, again consistent with Proposition .
4
Another empirical implication of Proposition is that belief systems that impose less of a
psychological tax on effort and success (i.e., low θ) should have a weaker hold in more zero-
sum (i.e., high α) environments. One such belief system is Christianity, which has boomed in
recentdecadesacrossAfrica,challengingandyetcoexistingalongsidetraditionalreligiousbeliefs
2021
(White, Muthukrishna and Norenzayan, ). Unlike traditional religions, Christianity teaches
2013 24
that everyone with faith can receive blessings from God (Norenzayan, ). Moreover, many
Pentecostal denominations, now dominant in Kananga as elsewhere in urban Africa (Ranger
2008
and Ranger, ), promote versions of the prosperity gospel with explicit encouragement of
2000 2012
hard work and economic ambition (Comaroff and Comaroff, , Freeman, ). Interestingly,
the link between zero-sum perceptions and Christianity is also found in Foster’s account of
Tzintzuntzan, where one of the accepted sources of income that did not generate envy and
1965 307
expectations of redistribution was a success due to favor from “saints” (see Foster, , p. ).
We, therefore, expect a negative relationship between zero-sum perceptions and the strength of
Christianbeliefs. OursurveyincludedquestionsaboutthestrengthofbeliefintheChristianGod,
the frequency of prayer, the frequency of attending church, and perceived closeness to Christians
23 TheexactwordingofthequestionsareprovidedinAppendixE.IandTableD5reportsthefactorloadingsofthe
principalcomponentanalysis.
24
Weempiricallyvalidatethisusingtwosurveyquestionsabouttheextenttowhichblessingsfrom“one’sancestors”
and“God”areviewedaslimited(seeAppendixE.IIfortheexactwordingofeachquestion). Whenaskedabout“God”
rather than “ancestors,” respondents were twice as likely to choose that they “agree strongly” that blessings are not
limitedandthateveryonecanbenefitfromthem(seeFigureD7). Theresultsareconsistentwithqualitativeevidence
fromfocusgroups,wheregainsobtainedthroughwitchcraftweretypicallydescribedaslimited,comingattheexpense
ofsomeone,andlikelytoinducejealousy. Bycontrast,blessingsfromGodwereunderstoodastheresultofindividuals’
devotion and due to God’s grace, which is not scarce, does not come at the expense of others, and is less likely to
inducejealousy.
23

Table2: Zero-SumIndexofSixSurveyQuestions,Envy,andWitchcraftintheDRC
DependentVariable:Principal-ComponentBasedMeasuresof:
Envy DifferenceBetween
ofOthers’ Witchcraft Christianity Witchcraft&
Success Beliefs Beliefs Christianity
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
PanelA:200PersonSample(2015)
Zero-sumthinking,0-1 0.421∗∗∗ 0.454∗∗∗ 0.545∗∗ 0.550∗∗ -0.210∗∗ -0.260∗∗ 0.755∗∗ 0.810∗∗
(0.114) (0.129) (0.170) (0.176) (0.104) (0.115) (0.235) (0.251)
Observations 204 204 197 197 197 197 197 197
Rsquared 0.575 0.615 0.455 0.501 0.417 0.476 0.430 0.484
PanelB:1,000PersonSample(2019)
Zero-sumthinking,0-1 0.157∗∗∗ 0.154∗∗∗ 0.028 0.028 -0.049∗∗ -0.049∗∗ 0.077∗∗ 0.077∗∗
(0.027) (0.027) (0.028) (0.028) (0.017) (0.017) (0.035) (0.035)
Observations 984 984 984 984 984 984 984 984
Rsquared 0.164 0.170 0.166 0.171 0.132 0.141 0.148 0.157
DemographicControls Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
EthnicityFE N Y N Y N Y N Y
Notes: Thistableexaminestherelationshipbetweenzero-sumviewsandanindividual’sself-reportedenvyofothers,beliefs
inwitchcraft,andbeliefsinChristianity,forthesampleofabout200respondentscollectedin2015(panelA)andthesample
ofabout1,000respondentscollectedin2019(panelB)inKananga,DRC.Itreportsestimatesofequation(8). Inallcolumns,
theexplanatoryvariableisthefirstprincipalcomponentofthesixzero-sumstatements. Incolumns1and2,thedependent
variablesarethefirstprincipalcomponentofthefoursurveyquestionsmeasuringself-reportedenvyofothers’success. The
first three questions ask about experiencing frustration when people succeed in life easily, resentment when neighbors are
successful,orfeelingsofinjusticewhensomepeopleseemtohaveallthetalents. Thefourthquestionasksiftherespondent
sometimeswishesthatrichandpowerfulpeoplelosetheiradvantage. Incolumns3and4,thedependentvariablesarethe
principal-component-basedmeasureofbeliefsinwitchcraftusingfoursurveyquestionsthataskaboutthestrengthofbeliefin
traditionalreligion,frequencyofprayertoancestors,frequencyofparticipationinritualsdevotedtoancestors,andhowclose
theyfeeltonon-ChristianswholiveinKananga.Incolumns5and6,thedependentvariablesaretheprincipal-component-based
measureofbeliefsinChristianityusingfoursurveyquestionsthataskaboutthestrengthofone’sbeliefintheChristianGod,
frequencyofprayer,frequencyofattendingchurch,andhowclosetherespondentfeelstoChristianswholiveinKananga. In
columns7and8,thedependentvariablesarethedifferenceintheprincipal-component-basedmeasureofbeliefsinwitchcraft
andChristianity. Weincludecontrolsforgender,age,andagesquaredandtheirinteractionsinallcolumns. Coefficientsare
reportedwithrobuststandarderrorsinparentheses.***,**,and*indicatesignificanceatthe1,5,and10percentlevels.
25
in Kananga. In both samples, a more zero-sum view of the world is negatively associated with
5 6 26
Christian beliefs (columns and ).
Asarobustnesscheck,wecalculateclusteredstandarderrorsassumingthatthegroupk varies
across the intersection of neighborhoods and ethnicities (i.e., different ethnic groups in different
neighborhoods face a different zero-sumness of their environment); neighborhood and gender
(i.e., different genders in different neighborhoods face different environments); and neighbor-
25
The survey questions and variable construction mimic those about traditional religious beliefs (i.e., witchcraft)
andarereportedinAppendixE.I.ThefactorloadingsarereportedinTableD6.
26
Giventhedivergentrelationshipsbetweenzero-sumperceptionsandwitchcraftversusChristianityandthefact
thatpeopletendtobelieveinbothsimultaneously,wealsocreateameasurethatcapturestherelativestrengthofone’s
belief in the two religions, constructed as one’s witchcraft belief measure minus their Christianity measure. We find
thatzero-sumperceptionsareassociatedwithastrongerbeliefinwitchcraftrelativetoChristianity(columns7and8).
24

hoods only (i.e., different people in different neighborhoods face different environments) and
report the results in Table D 7 along with the randomization inference p-values, which do not
make any assumptions about the error structure. Reassuringly, the standard errors are similar to
2
the robust ones reported in Table .
As another sensitivity check, we test the assumption that α and σ are uncorrelated. Although
σ influences the evolutionarily stable belief θ∗, most of our analysis concerns comparative statics
for α and thus relegates this effect to the regression residuals. Our estimates will be unbiased if
σ and α are uncorrelated. To measure the extent of assortativity (σ) in this population, we elicit
1000
homophilyinrespondents’socialnetworks. Questionsinthe , -personsurveyaskrespondents
tolistindividualstheywouldgoto(orwhowouldcometothem)inninedifferentsituations,and
wecollectinformationabouttherespondents’linkstotheseindividuals. Wecalculatethefraction
1 2 3 4
ofthoselistedwhobelongtoarespondent’s: ( )nuclearfamily,( )extendedfamily,( )church,( )
5
tribe, or ( ) religion. Using principal components analysis, we then create an aggregate measure
27
of homophily based on the first principal component. Across respondents, our measure of σ is
uncorrelated with our measure of zero-sum perceptions (Table D 11 ) and controlling for σ does
12
not influence our estimated coefficients for zero-sum perceptions (Table D ).
5. Global Evidence from the World Values Survey
4
The DRC samples allowed us to empirically validate Proposition concerning the link between
the zero-sumness of the environment and demotivating beliefs in a pre-industrial society com-
parable to the one Foster studied. However, these samples have limited cross-society variation
and no information on material welfare and subjective well-being. As a result, we cannot test
4
Proposition concerning the link between zero-sum beliefs, material welfare, and subjective
2 3
well-being across societies, or Propositions and concerning the relationship between the
strength of demotivating beliefs and material welfare and subjective well-being when holding
constant the zero-sumness of the environment. We now turn to a global analysis to test these
predictions.
27
DetailsaboutthesurveyquestionsareprovidedinAppendixE.IV,andthefactorloadingsforthefirstprincipal
componentarereportedinTableD10
25

A. Data
We measure the zero-sumness of a person’s environment using a question from the World
Values Survey (WVS), which has a similar structure to our zero-sum questions from the DRC.
Respondentsaregiventwoopposingstatements,onethatiszero-sum–“Peoplecanonlygetrich
at the expense of others” – and the other positive sum – “Wealth can grow so there’s enough for
everyone.” The respondents are asked to report their views on a ten-point scale between the two
extremes. We normalize the variable to lie between zero and one and increase in zero-sumness.
8
Figure D , which reports the distribution of the zero-sum measure, shows substantial variation
in the extent to which individuals view wealth as zero-sum.
We begin by again validating that this measure reflects the true zero-sumness of individu-
als’ environments. We estimate the relationship between the level of economic growth in the
20 30
respondent’s country in the first or years of their life and their perceived zero-sumness.
The logic is that low economic growth should lead people to view the environment as zero-sum:
output is not expanding over time but divided up year after year. Conversely, higher growth
creates opportunities for everyone to become better off and should thus lead to lower perceived
zero-sumness. Conditional on country-fixed effects, birth-year-fixed effects, and demographic
controls, we find that lower economic growth is indeed associated with a more zero-sum view of
3 28
the world (Table C ). . The results align with our findings from the DRC and evidence from the
2023
United States (Chinoy et al., ).
B. Zero-sum perceptions and demotivating beliefs
We first examine the relationship between zero-sum views and demotivating beliefs that reduce
4
effort,againmotivatedbyProposition ofthemodel. Demotivatingbeliefsdifferacrosscountries.
In some, they might take the form of beliefs in witchcraft or the evil eye. In others, a dislike for
greed and individual accumulation or a belief that hard work does not result in success. In
industrialized countries, the best proxies for θ are beliefs about the importance of hard work,
economic success, and individual achievement, which are available in the WVS.
We use the WVS data to estimate the following equation:
Y = α +βZeroSum +X Γ+ε , ( 9 )
i,c,t c,t i,c,t i,c,t i,c,t
28
DetailsabouttheestimationandtheresultsarereportedinAppendixIII
26

where i indices individuals, c country of residence, and t the year of the survey. ZeroSum is
i,c,t
our measure of zero-sum for individual i. α denote country by survey year fixed effects. Y
c,t i,c,t
denotes a measure of the strength in which person i holds a particular demotivating belief. The
vectorX includesthefollowingindividual-leveldemographiccontrols: agenderindicator,age,
i,c,t
age squared, and interactions between the gender and age measures.
We begin by considering the belief of whether hard work brings success. Respondents report
1 10
theiranswersona - integerscale. Wereorderandnormalizethevariablesuchthatzeroequals
full agreement with “in the long run, hard work usually brings a better life,” and one equals full
29
agreement with “hard work doesn’t generally bring success.” The measure, thus, increases in
4
the belief that hard work does not pay off. Consistent with Proposition , zero-sum beliefs are
3 1
associated with a stronger belief that hard work is unlikely to bring success (Table , column ).
We next look at two related measures that capture respondents’ views of whether low effort
explainswhysomepeoplearepoor. Thefirstsurveyquestionis: “Why,inyouropinion,arethere
people in this country who live in need?” We create a variable that takes on the value of zero
if they choose the answer “because of laziness and lack of willpower,” and the value of one if
theychoosetheanswer“becauseofanunfairsociety.” Thesecondmeasurecapturesviewsabout
whetherthepoorcanescapepovertythrougheffort: “Inyouropinion,domostpoorpeopleinthis
country have a chance of escaping from poverty, or is there very little chance of escaping?” We
create a variable that takes on the value of zero if the respondent chooses the answer “They have
a chance” and one if they choose “There is very little chance.” Thus, both questions measure the
belief that effort and hard work fail to explain economic success. Zero-sum views again correlate
2 3
with the belief that poverty does not arise from a lack of effort (columns and ).
We consider three additional demotivating beliefs. The first is the extent to which people
get disutility from asking others for money. In a setting where it is shameful to be helped
by others, individuals will try their hardest to provide for themselves. The survey question
asks respondents if they agree with the statement: “It is humiliating to receive money without
having to work for it” Respondents can choose “strongly agree,” “agree,” “neither,” “disagree,”
or “strongly disagree.” We normalize the measure to lie between zero and one and to increase
in the respondent’s disagreement with the statement. Again, the more zero-sum view of the
4
world is associated with feeling less humiliation from receiving money (column ). The last two
29
TheexactwordingofthisandallotherWVSvariablesusedinthepaperarereportedinAppendixE.VII.
27

Table3: Zero-SumandDemotivatingBeliefs
DependentVariable:DemotivatingBelief:
Humiliatingtoreceive
Hardworkbrings Peoplearepoor Peoplehaveachance Importanttometobe Howimportant
moneywithout
success, becauseoflaziness, toescapepoverty, successful, iswork,
workingforit,
0=fullyagreeto 0=agreeor 0=agreeor 0=verymuchto 0=veryimportant
0=stronglyagreeto
1=fullydisagree 1=disagree 1=disagree 1=notatall to1=notatall
1=stronglydisagree
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Zero-sumthinking,0-1 0.112*** 0.077*** 0.121*** 0.023*** 0.024*** 0.034***
(0.002) (0.006) (0.006) (0.004) (0.002) (0.002)
Meandependentvariable 0.363 0.697 0.602 0.352 0.391 0.162
Std.dev.dependentvariable 0.321 0.459 0.489 0.296 0.290 0.248
Meanindependentvariable 0.406 0.393 0.394 0.406 0.416 0.407
Std.dev.independentvariable 0.309 0.317 0.315 0.297 0.305 0.309
Observations 246,408 55,871 59,052 60,856 151,270 242,255
Rsquared 0.121 0.125 0.178 0.096 0.171 0.111
DemographicControls Y Y Y Y Y Y
Wave-countryFE Y Y Y Y Y Y
Notes:ThetablereportsOLSestimatesincolumns1–6. Anobservationisanindividual. Allspecificationsincludesurveywavebycountryfixedeffects. Theindependent
variableisascalevariablerangingfromzerotoone,withonerepresenting“Peoplecanonlygetrichattheexpenseofothers”andzerorepresenting“Wealthcangrowso
there’senoughforeveryone.”Thedependentvariablesarecategoricalvariablesappearingascolumnheads.Demographiccontrolsincludeage,agesquared,gender,andtheir
interactions.Coefficientsarereportedwithrobuststandarderrorsinparentheses.***,**,and*indicatesignificanceatthe1,5,and10percentlevels.
questions measure the perceived importance of achievement and work. The first question asks
whether it is important to be “very successful...to have people recognize one’s achievement.”
The second question asks respondents how important work is to them. Respondents choose
responses ranging from “not at all important” to “very important.” Both measures are coded to
be decreasing in the importance placed on achievement and work – i.e., increasing in the extent
5 6
to which the beliefs are demotivating. The estimates, reported in columns and , show that
individuals with a more zero-sum worldview hold beliefs that place less importance on their
success and on their work.
C. Zero-sum perceptions, effort, and economic outcomes
4
We next consider the part of Proposition arguing that zero-sum environments, by creating
demotivating beliefs, will result in less effort and lower material welfare. We first test this
1 10
prediction by examining respondents’ self-reported income on a - integer scale normalized
to range from zero to one. We also examine a question about the net savings of the respondent’s
family. We again normalize the variable to lie between zero and one and to increase in savings.
Individualswithamorezero-sumviewoftheworldreporthavinglowerincomesandlesssavings
4 1 2
(Table ,columns and ). Consistentwiththemodel’sprediction,amorezero-sumenvironment
28

Table4: Zero-SumPerceptionsandEconomicWelfare
DependentVariable:MeasuresofEconomicWelfare:
Educational Cognitivevs.manual Supervisingsomeone
Incomedecile, Familysavings, Class,
attainment, worktasks, atwork,
0=bottomdecileto 0=borrowedto 0=lowerclassto
0=primaryschoolorless 0=manualto 0=noto
1=topdecile 1=saved 1=upperclass
to1=universityormore 1=cognitive 1=yes
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Zero-sumthinking,0-1 -0.039*** -0.032*** -0.030*** -0.049*** -0.046*** -0.045***
(0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.004) (0.004) (0.002)
Meandependentvariable 0.407 0.625 0.522 0.446 0.327 0.421
Std.dev.dependentvariable 0.257 0.309 0.337 0.346 0.469 0.245
Meanindependentvariable 0.404 0.406 0.406 0.416 0.415 0.409
Std.dev.independentvariable 0.309 0.308 0.309 0.301 0.302 0.307
Observations 229,719 203,716 219,524 116,885 119,888 207,165
R-squared 0.159 0.090 0.173 0.087 0.106 0.111
DemographicControls Y Y Y Y Y Y
Wave-countryFE Y Y Y Y Y Y
Notes:ThetablereportsOLSestimates.Anobservationisanindividual.Allspecificationsincludesurveywavebycountryfixedeffects.Theindependentvariableisascale
variablerangingfromzerotoone,withonerepresenting“Peoplecanonlygetrichattheexpenseofothers,”andzerorepresenting“Wealthcangrowsothere’senoughfor
everyone.”Thedependentvariablesarecategoricalvariablesappearingascolumnheads.Demographiccontrolsincludeage,agesquared,gender,ageinteractedwithgender,
andage-squaredinteractedwithgender. Coefficientsarereportedwithrobuststandarderrorsinparentheses. ***,**,and*indicatesignificanceatthe1,5,and10percent
levels.
30
is associated with lower material welfare. Next, we examine education, an investment that
requires effort but can enhance productivity. Again, consistent with the model’s predictions,
3
respondents who view the world as more zero-sum have lower levels of education (column ).
If this relationship is robust, we should also observe a similar negative association with jobs that
requirehavingmadecostlyinvestmentsinhumancapitalaccumulation. Indeed,individualswith
stronger zero-sum views are less likely to be employed in cognitively demanding occupations
4 5
(column ) and are less likely to supervise someone at work (column ).
Finally, we explore the relationship between demotivating beliefs and material welfare. In
particular, part (i) of Corollary 1 predicts that material welfare should be decreasing in demo-
tivating beliefs. Consistent with this prediction, we find a negative relationship between each
13
of the six measures of demotivating beliefs and most measures of material welfare (Table D ).
More zero-sum environments are associated with lower material welfare and more demotivating
beliefs, inducing a negative relationship between demotivating beliefs and material welfare.
30 Wealsoexaminesocioeconomicstatus. Respondentsreportbelongingtoeither: (1)Lowerclass;(2)Workingclass;
(3)Lowermiddleclass;(4)Uppermiddleclass;and(5)Upperclass. Weuseintegervaluesreportedforeachcategory
and normalize the index to lie between 0 and 1. Consistent with the model’s prediction, zero-sum perceptions are
associatedwithalowerself-reportedsocioeconomicclass(column6).
29

D. Zero-sum perceptions, demotivating beliefs, and happiness
4
Proposition focuses on the relationship between a zero-sum environment and an individual’s
subjective well-being. We examine two measures of subjective well-being: “happiness” and “life
satisfaction.” The raw (binscatter) cross-individual relationship between zero-sum beliefs and
happiness or life satisfaction, conditional on country-by-survey-wave fixed effects, is reported
2
in Figure . There is a clear negative relationship between viewing the world as zero-sum and
4 3
reported happiness and well-being, in line with Proposition . Estimates of equation ( ) for both
measuresofwell-beingastheoutcomeconfirmthisnegativeandsignificantrelationshipbetween
5 1
zero-sum perceptions and life satisfaction (Table , column ).
We also explore the relationship between demotivating beliefs and subjective well-being. Part
(ii) of Corollary 1 predicts that subjective well-being should decrease in demotivating beliefs.
Consistent with this prediction, there is a negative relationship between each of the six measures
5 2 7
of demotivating beliefs and both measures of subjective well-being (Table , columns – ). More
zero-sum environments are associated with lower material welfare, subjective well-being, and
more demotivating beliefs. This induces a negative relationship between demotivating beliefs
and subjective well-being.
Figure 2: Relationship Between Zero-Sum Perceptions and Happiness or Life Satisfaction
Notes: Thisfigurereportstherelationshipbetweenzero-sumperceptionsandhappiness(leftpanel),andzero-sumperceptionsand
satisfaction (right panel) using a binscatter plot. Zero-sum thinking is measured using a scale variable ranging from zero to one,
withonerepresenting“Peoplecanonlygetrichattheexpenseofothers”andzerorepresenting“Wealthcangrowsothere’senough
foreveryone.” Happinessismeasuredbasedonascalevariablereportingrespondents’answerstothequestion“Takingallthings
together, would you say you are,” with zero indicating “Not at all happy” and one indicating “Very happy.” Life satisfaction is
measured based on respondents’ answers to the question “How satisfied are you with the financial situation of your household?
If‘1’meansyouarecompletelydissatisfiedonthisscale,and‘10’meansyouarecompletelysatisfied,wherewouldyouputyour
satisfactionwithyourhousehold’sfinancialsituation?”
30

Table5: Zero-SumPerceptionsorDemotivatingBeliefsandHappinessorLifeSatisfaction
Measureofdemotivatingbeliefsused:
Humiliating
Peopleare Peoplehave Important
Hardwork toreceive Howimportant
poorbecause achanceto tometobe
bringssuccess, moneywithout iswork,
oflaziness, escapepoverty, successful,
0=fullyagreeto workingforit, 0=veryimportant
0=agreeor 0=agreeor 0=verymuch
1=fullydisagree 0=stronglyagreeto to1=notatall
1=disagree 1=disagree to1=notatall
1=stronglydisagree
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
PanelA:Self-ReportedHappiness(0-1)asDependentVariable
Zero-sumthinking,0-1 -0.051***
(0.002)
Demotivatingbelief,θ -0.046*** -0.045*** -0.043*** -0.019*** -0.045*** -0.038***
(0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002) (0.002)
Meandependentvariable 0.688 0.694 0.653 0.653 0.696 0.707 0.692
Std.dev.dependentvariable 0.249 0.246 0.255 0.254 0.243 0.244 0.248
Meanindependentvariable 0.405 0.365 0.701 0.599 0.346 0.394 0.159
Std.dev.independentvariable 0.309 0.323 0.458 0.490 0.296 0.292 0.247
Observations 246,094 329,899 62,055 64,833 103,517 156,835 398,525
Rsquared 0.145 0.136 0.187 0.181 0.105 0.123 0.134
PanelB:SubjectiveLifeSatisfaction(1-10)asDependentVariable
Zero-sumthinking,0-1 -0.628***
(0.016)
Demotivatingbelief,θ -0.474*** -0.622*** -0.551*** -0.226*** -0.525*** -0.252***
(0.013) (0.022) (0.020) (0.025) (0.021) (0.015)
Meandependentvariable 6.656 6.746 6.177 6.205 6.582 6.791 6.667
Std.dev.dependentvariable 2.382 2.360 2.626 2.600 2.400 2.278 2.416
Meanindependentvariable 0.406 0.366 0.705 0.600 0.347 0.395 0.159
Std.dev.independentvariable 0.310 0.323 0.456 0.490 0.296 0.292 0.247
Observations 245,792 329,770 60,594 64,415 103,372 157,059 400,198
Rsquared 0.173 0.164 0.246 0.242 0.167 0.132 0.172
DemographicControls Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Wave-countryFE Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Notes:Thetablereportstherelationshipbetweenzero-sumperceptionsordemotivatingbeliefsandhappiness(panelA)orlifesatisfaction(panelB)usingOLSestimates.An
observationisanindividual.InpanelA,thedependentvariableishappiness,whichismeasuredbasedonascalevariablereportingrespondents’answerstothequestion
“Takingallthingstogether,wouldyousayyouare,”withzeroindicating“Notatallhappy”andoneindicating“Veryhappy.” InpanelB,thedependentvariableislife
satisfaction,whichismeasuredbasedonrespondents’answerstothequestion“Howsatisfiedareyouwiththefinancialsituationofyourhousehold? ‘1’meansyouare
completelydissatisfiedonthisscale,and‘10’meansyouarecompletelysatisfied,wherewouldyouputyoursatisfactionwithyourhousehold’sfinancialsituation?” The
independentvariablesareascalerangingfromzerotoone,withonerepresenting“Peoplecanonlygetrichattheexpenseofothers,”andzerorepresenting“Wealthcan
growsothere’senoughforeveryone”(column1),andcategoricalvariables,rangingfrom0,representingagreement,to1,indicatingdisagreementwiththesentence–except
thesentence“Howimportantiswork,”where0means“veryimportant”and1means“notatall”–(columns2–7). Allspecificationsincludewave-countryfixedeffects.
Demographiccontrolsincludeage,agesquared,gender,andtheirinteractions. Coefficientsarereportedwithrobuststandarderrorsinparentheses. ***,**,and*indicate
significanceatthe1,5,and10percentlevels.
E. Demotivating Beliefs and Economic Outcomes in a Fixed Zero-Sum Setting
While the preceding analysis focused on relationships across groups in environments of varying
zero-sumness (α), we now explore the strength of demotivating beliefs, material welfare, and
subjective well-being within a group k (with a fixed zero-sum environment).
Specifically, Proposition 2 predicts an optimal strength of demotivating beliefs θ∗ within a
group k in an environment of zero-sumness α. Material welfare should be hump-shaped in
the strength of demotivating beliefs θ. To test this, we divide the sample into deciles based
on respondents’ perceived zero-sumness. We interpret a decile as being analogous to a group
k, with a fixed level of α, in the model. To account for differences in language, gender, and
31

age, we first net out country-wave fixed effects and demographic controls before creating the
zero-sum deciles. Within each decile, we examine the relationship between demotivating beliefs
and income levels. We report estimates for the two measures of demotivating beliefs with the
largest sample and multiple possible responses – i.e., not just agree/disagree – and thus allow
us to test for the predicted hump-shaped relationship. The two questions are whether “hard
work brings success” (N = 228,356) and “how important is work” (N = 224,534). 31 Figures 3
4
and report the estimated relationships between demotivating beliefs and income. Consistent
2
with Proposition , we see strong evidence of a hump-shaped relationship between demotivating
beliefs and material welfare measured by income for virtually all zero-sum deciles.
We find similar results when we omit demographic controls or country-wave fixed effects
9 10
(Figures D and D ), when using alternative measures of demotivating beliefs only available in
13 14 32
smallersamples(FiguresD andD ), orifwemeasurematerialwelfareusingsavingsinstead
17 18 19 20
of income (Figures D and D ), education (Figures D and D ), employment in a cognitively
21 22 23
demanding occupation (Figures D and D ), supervising someone at work (Figures D and
24 25 26
D ), and socioeconomic status (Figures D and D ).
3 1
By contrast, Proposition and the corresponding numerical results in Figure A predict that,
withinthegroup,subjectivewell-beingismaximizedbythetrue(non-demotivating)beliefθ = 0,
isstrictlyconvex,and(mostly)decreasingindemotivatingbeliefsforagivenzero-sumnessofthe
environment α. Figures 5 and 6 confirm that subjective well-being, measured by happiness, is
highest for the least demotivating belief and mostly decreasing in demotivating beliefs. Again,
wefindsimilarresultswhenweomitdemographiccontrolsorcountry-wavefixedeffects(Figures
11 12 15 16
D and D ), when using alternative measures of demotivating beliefs (Figures D and D ),
27 28
or when we measure subjective well-being using life satisfaction (Figures D and D ).
6. Long-Run Development: Beliefs and Innovation
Finally, we examine the implications of our theory for long-term economic development, which
was a component of Foster’s original argument. He hypothesized that the demotivating beliefs
created by zero-sum environments adversely affected innovation and growth. To investigate this
31 Wefindsimilarpatternsforotherdemotivatingbeliefsmeasuresavailableforsmallersamples(FiguresD13–D16).
32
Wedonotreporttheestimatesforthetwodemotivatingbeliefquestions“Peoplehaveachancetoescapepoverty”
and“People arepoor becauseof laziness”because theyonly havetwopossible responses(agree ordisagree), which
preventsusfromtestingforahump-shapedrelationship.
32

Figure3: RelationshipBetweenDemotivatingBeliefs(WorkUnimportant)andIncome–Holding
Constant Zero-Sumness
Notes: Thefigurereportstherelationshipbetweenrespondents’demotivatingbeliefsandlevelofincomeforeachzero-sumdecile.
Country-wavefixedeffectsanddemographiccontrolsarenettedoutbeforecreatingthezero-sumdeciles.Thedemotivatingbeliefin
thisfigureisreportedbasedonrespondents’answerstotheversionofthefollowingquestionthatasksaboutwork:“Foreachofthe
following,indicatehowimportantitisinyourlife. Wouldyousayitis,”withtheoptions: “1Veryimportant,2Ratherimportant,
3Notveryimportant,4Notatallimportant.” Theseresponsesarereversescored,sothevariableisincreasinginthedemotivating
belief“Workisnotimportantatall.”(N =224,032).
33

Figure 4: Relationship Between Demotivating Beliefs (Hard Work Does Not Bring Success) and
Income – Holding Constant Zero-Sumness
Notes: Thefigurereportstherelationshipbetweenrespondents’demotivatingbeliefsandlevelofincomeforeachzero-sumdecile.
Country-wavefixedeffectsanddemographiccontrolsarenettedoutbeforecreatingthezero-sumdeciles. Thedemotivatingbelief
in this figure is reported based on how much respondents agreed with the statement “In the long run, hard work usually brings
abetterlife”onascaleofonetoten, withoneindicatingcompleteagreementwiththestatementandtenindicating“Hardwork
doesn’tgenerallybringsuccess–it’smoreamatterofluckandconnections.” Theseresponsesarereversescored,sothevariableis
increasinginthedemotivatingbelief“Hardworkdoesnotbringsuccess.”(N =227,851).
34

Figure 5: Relationship Between Demotivating Beliefs (Work Unimportant) and Happiness –
Holding Constant Zero-Sumness
Notes:Thefigurereportstherelationshipbetweenrespondents’demotivatingbeliefsandlevelofhappinessforeachzero-sumdecile.
Country-wavefixedeffectsanddemographiccontrolsarenettedoutbeforecreatingthezero-sumdeciles. Thedemotivatingbelief
inthisfigureisreportedbasedonrespondents’answerstothequestion(withworkbeingtheaspectrespondentswereaskedthe
question about) “For each of the following, indicate how important it is in your life. Would you say it is,” with options “1 Very
important, 2 Rather important, 3 Not very important, 4 Not at all important.” These responses are reverse scored to achieve the
demotivatingbeliefusedinthefigure“Workisnotimportantatall.”(N =239,865).
35

Figure 6: Relationship Between Demotivating Beliefs (Hard Work Does Not Bring Success) and
Happiness – Holding Constant Zero-Sumness
Notes:Thefigurereportstherelationshipbetweenrespondents’demotivatingbeliefsandlevelofhappinessforeachzero-sumdecile.
Country-wavefixedeffectsanddemographiccontrolsarenettedoutbeforecreatingthezero-sumdeciles.Thedemotivatingbeliefin
thisfigureisreportedbasedonhowmuchrespondentsagreedwiththestatement“Inthelongrun,hardworkusuallybringsabetter
life”onascaleofonetoten, withoneindicatingcompleteagreementwiththestatementandtenindicating“Hardworkdoesn’t
generallybringsuccess–it’smoreamatterofluckandconnections.” Theseresponsesarereversescoredtoachievethedemotivating
beliefusedinthefigure“Hardworkdoesnotbringsuccess.”(N =243,927).
36

possibility, we endogenize the technology level A(t) and examine its co-evolution with the dis-
tribution of beliefs q. We find that while demotivating beliefs reduce a negative contemporaneous
externality by limiting zero-sum competition, they also reduce a positive intertemporal externality
from knowledge accumulation and can trap the economy in an underdeveloped state.
We need to specify a technology dynamic to say more about the expanded system (q,A). We
assume technology cannot go below a subsistence level A > 0. If A(T) ≤ A for some t = T,
then A(T) = A for all t > T. Otherwise, if A > A, technological development is governed by the
following equation of motion:
dA
= X(q,A)−δA, ( 10 )
dt
whereδ ∈ (0,1) istherateoftechnologicaldepreciationandX(q,A) isthemeanlevelofeffortin
7 33
the population described in equation ( ). The positive effect of effort on the rate of innovation
could arise from learning-by-doing and knowledge spillovers from productive activity, as in
1999 2014 34
Aghion, Caroli and Garcia-Penalosa ( ) and Gershman ( ).
To examine the long-term effect of demotivating beliefs on development, we substitute the
expression for X(q,A) from ( 7 ) into ( 10 ) to get:
dA > = 0 ⇐⇒ A > = δ ≡ D∗(q,Θ). ( 11 )
dt < < ∑n q (1−θ )2
i=1 i i
We call D∗(q,Θ) the development barrier. If A starts out above D∗(q,Θ), there is perpetual
growth. If,instead,itstartsbelowD∗(q,Θ),theleveloftechnologyAdeclinesuntilitreachesthe
subsistence level A.
There are two comparative static results regarding the development barrier D∗(q,Θ). First,
rulingoutdemotivatingbeliefslowersthedevelopmentbarrierandexpandsthesetofconditions
5
thatleadtoperpetualgrowth. WeformallyestablishthisresultinProposition inAppendixB.V.
2011
Hence, demotivating belief systems can be viewed as a kludge (Ely, ): they reduce wasteful
zero-sum competition but they also create productive inefficiencies that can trap the economy in
a low-technology state.
Second,thereisaconnectionbetweenzero-sumnessandlong-termdevelopment. Defineq∗(α)
as the state where the entire population holds belief θ∗ = σα, which it converges to when θ∗ ∈
33 The results do not change qualitatively if we assume dA = (1−α)X(q,A)−δA, so that effort in zero-sum
dt
interactionsdoesnotcontributetoinnovation.
34
The effort choices characterized here continue to hold even with forward-looking agents because agents are
non-atomicandthusdonotindividuallyaffectmeaneffort.
37

Figure 7: The Development Barrier at Different Levels of Zero-Sumness of the Environment
(a)Highzero-sumness(α=0.9)
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
q
A
(b)Lowerzero-sumness(α=0.5)
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
q
A
Notes: The figure reports the vector plot of (q,A) under belief set Θ = {0,θ∗}, where q is the population share of the optimal
demotivatingbeliefθ∗. Theotherparametervaluesare: σ =0.4,δ =0.8. PanelAconsidersahighlevelofzero-sumness,α=0.9,
andthecorrespondinglevelofdemotivatingbelief, θ∗ = 0.36. PanelBconsidersalowerlevelofzero-sumness, α = 0.5, andthe
correspondinglevelofdemotivatingbelief,θ∗=0.2.
Θ. The development barrier is then D∗(q∗(α),Θ) = δ , which is strictly increasing in zero-
1−σα
sumness α when there is positive sorting (σ > 0). Hence, any shock to the economy that lowers
its degree of zero-sumness makes it easier for the economy to transition to perpetual growth.
To illustrate this visually, consider the stylized case where the set of beliefs consists of the
true (non-demotivating) belief 0 and the ‘optimal’ demotivating belief θ∗ = σα, i.e., Θ = {0,θ∗}.
Let q be the population share of θ∗ types and the cultural dynamic dq be the standard replicator
dt
7
dynamic. Vector plots are presented in Figure . Panel (a) depicts a case of high zero-sumness,
α = 0.9. Assumingσ = 0.4,thedemotivatingbeliefθ∗ equals 0 . 36 . Thedevelopmentbarrieristhe
separatrix,whichrisesfrom 0 . 8 whenq = 0toaround 2 whenq = 1. Panel(b)depictsareduction
in zero-sumness to 0 . 5 and a corresponding shift to the less demotivating belief θ∗ = 0.2. We see
that the reduction in zero-sumness α and the corresponding belief θ∗ speeds up growth and
lowers the development barrier. Even if the drop in α is temporary, it can produce perpetual
growth from states that would otherwise lead to technological regress.
This insight may inform the long-standing historical question of why the economic take-off
18 19
of the late th and th centuries Industrial Revolution began in Western Europe in the second
2016
half of the second millennium CE (Mokyr, ). Consistent with the explanation provided by
2020 1500
Henrich ( ), our model suggests that Europe’s global expansion and colonialism after
38

CE may have reduced the zero-zumness of the environment through the emergence of new
2005
trading opportunities (Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, ), an inflow of new technologies
2010 2011 2012
and resources, like new crops (Nunn and Qian, , ), fertilizers/guano (Mann, ),
2022
stimulantslikesugar,coffee,andtea(HerschandVoth, ),andaperceptionoflandabundance.
Unleashed by colonialism and aided by the devastating impact of Eurasian diseases, this shock
may have opened an exit ramp from a zero-sum trap. According to our theory, such effects could
have triggered a cultural shift to a less demotivating belief system accompanied by higher effort
exertion and more learning-by-doing. This cultural shift could have ushered in technological
breakthroughs and a transition to modern, intensive economic growth.
Several lines of historical evidence suggest a shift away from traits that curbed ambition
1500
and effort after CE. First, European populations appear to be working longer and harder
1600 1998 1987 2020
after CE (Voth, , Clark, , Henrich, ), which has been coined the “industrious
2008 2006 2010 2016
revolution”(Vries, ). Second,consistentwithsuchbehavior,McCloskey( , , )has
arguedthatnewbourgeoisvirtuesthatplacedvalueonhardwork,thrift,andconsumption,werea
1930
necessary pre-condition for the Industrial Revolution. Max Weber ( ) and David McClelland
( 1961 ) also stress the importance of similar values – what they call the spirit of capitalism and need
for achievement, respectively – for sustained economic development. Third, more importance was
given to intellectual, economic, and moral progress after 1500 (Wootton, 2016 , Howes, 2016 ). 35
In our terminology, the emergence of these values constituted a shift to a less demotivating
belief system, which promoted economic activity. Our theory suggests that this cultural shift
might have been driven by colonialism, the expansion of international trade, the influx of new
tools and techniques, and the sudden “availability” of vast tracts of land and other resources on
the eve of the Industrial Revolution. We, therefore, posit a cultural relationship between colo-
36
nialism, trade, psychology, and the Great Divergence. While a complete empirical examination
is beyond the scope of this paper, we provide suggestive evidence for the plausibility of this
interpretation. We use Google N-grams to look at the frequency of the mention of progress in
35
Atthesametimethatsuchbeliefswerespreadinginpre-industrialrevolutionEurope,witchcraftbeliefs,accusa-
tions,andprosecutionswereindeclineandwouldeventuallyvanish(Macfarlane,1999,Bever,2009).
36 In our model, a reduction in σ and the corresponding belief θ∗ would also contribute to speeding up growth
and lowering the development barriers. This prediction relates to work by Alger and Weibull (2010), who use an
evolutionaryanalysistoshedlightonhowfamilytiesaffectincentivesandeconomicdevelopment. Indeed,historians
havearguedthattheonsetoftheIndustrialRevolutionwasassociatedwithweakerfamilytiesduetomigrationfrom
rural to urban areas (Laslett and Wall, 1972), changes in gender roles (Horrell and Humphries, 1995), and in the
prevalence of child labor (Humphries, 2013). Thus, changes at the onset of the Early Modern period, which affected
bothαandσwouldhavehadreinforcingandcomplementaryeffects.
39

1600 1900 2010
books published between and (Michel et al., ). While acknowledging the caveats
2015
associated with historical counts from N-grams (Pechenick, Danforth and Dodds, , Younes
2019
and Reips, ), we see that the use of the word “progress” increased and the use of “jealousy”
and “envy” declined right around the time of the take-off of the Industrial Revolution (Figure
29
D ). While these patterns do not prove that a change in the zero-sumness of the environment
and demotivating beliefs caused the Industrial Revolution (nor does our theory imply it), they
do suggest a possible self-reinforcing confluence of factors. Changes in the zero-sumness of the
environment possibly shaped cultural beliefs and economic behavior and boosted technological
innovation, which in turn altered the economic environment, continuing the process.
7. Conclusions
This paper studied the evolution of demotivating belief systems and their effect on economic
development. In an evolutionary model inspired by Foster’s “image of limited good,” we
showed that demotivating beliefs can spread in environments where economic interactions are
zero-sum. We also showed that the effects of zero-sum production are very different within
or across populations. Within a population, an intermediate demotivating belief can improve
material welfare by reducing excessive competition, but well-being decreases monotonically with
demotivating beliefs. Across populations, there is a positive relationship between zero-sumness
of the environment and demotivating beliefs, and both negatively affect material welfare and
subjective well-being.
We tested these theoretical predictions in the data. In two samples from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we found robust evidence that respondents with a more zero-sum view
of the world hold stronger demotivating beliefs, including envy about the success of others and
witchcraft beliefs that cast success as suspicious. In the global World Value Survey sample, we
again documented a robust positive relationship between perceived zero-sumness and demoti-
vating beliefs, including skepticism about the return to effort and the value of hard work. Also
consistent with the model, we found that zero-sum perceptions and the resulting demotivating
beliefs are associated with less happiness and lower life satisfaction. Lastly, we showed evidence
of the divergence between material welfare and subjective well-being predicted by the model.
When holding the degree of zero-sumness in the environment constant, income is hump-shaped
in demotivating beliefs, while happiness decreases with the strength of demotivating beliefs.
40

Finally, we turned to the models’ implications for innovation. When adding technology to
the model, we showed that demotivating beliefs, by discouraging effort, could introduce a long-
run dynamic inefficiency and trap a society in a low technology state. However, a short-lived
decrease in the zero-sumness of the environment could induce sufficient cultural change away
fromdemotivatingbeliefsystemstopromoteeffort,innovation,andashifttowardahigh-growth
regime. We discussed how these predictions provide insights into our understanding of the
cultural roots of the rise of Western Europe.
The paper leaves many important questions unanswered regarding the evolution of demoti-
vating belief systems and their interactions with economic development. To what extent was the
Great Divergence partly triggered by a cultural shift in Western Europe away from demotivating
belief systems that suppressed effort? Has the intensification of economic rivalry and scarcity in
thepastdecadeincreasedtheeffectivezero-sumnessoftheenvironmentinmanycountries? Ifso,
doesthisincreasehelpexplaintheglobalincreaseinpopulism,nativism,andanti-elitesentiment
2022
(Guriev and Papaioannou, ), the turn away from meritocracy in the United States (Sandel,
2020 2022
),ortheriseofincelsindatingmarkets(Brooks,Russo-BatterhamandBlake, )? Weview
these questions as fertile ground for future work.
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson, “The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade, Institu-
tionalChange,andEconomicGrowth,”AmericanEconomicReview,2005,95(3),546–579.
Aghion, Philippe, Eve Caroli, and Cecilia Garcia-Penalosa, “Inequality and Economic Growth: The
PerspectiveoftheNewGrowthTheories,”JournalofEconomicLiterature,1999,37(4),1615–1660.
Akerlof, Robert, Niko Matouschek, and Luis Rayo, “Stories at Work,” AEA Papers and Proceedings, 2020,
110,199–204.
Alesina, Alberto, Sebastian Hohmann, Stelios Michalopoulos, and Elias Papaioannou, “Religion and
SocialMobilityinAfrica,”Nature,2023,618,134–143.
Algan, Yann and Pierre Cahuc, “Inherited Trust and Growth,” American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (5),
2060–2092.
Alger, Ingela and Jörgen W. Weibull, “Kinship, Incentives, and Evolution,” American Economic Review,
2010,100(4),1725–58.
and Jörgen W Weibull, “A generalization of Hamilton’s rule-Love others how much?,” Journal of
TheoreticalBiology,2012,299,42–54.
and Jörgen W. Weibull, “Homo Moralis–Preference Evolution under Incomplete Information and
AssortativeMatching,”Econometrica,2013,81(6),2269–2302.
and ,“EvolutionandKantianMorality,”GamesandEconomicBehavior,2016,98,56–67.
Becker,GaryS.,“Altruism,Egoism,andGeneticFitness: EconomicsandSociobiology,”JournalofEconomic
Literature,1976,14(3),817–826.
Becker, Sascha O. and Ludger Woessmann, “Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital Theory of Protestant
EconomicHistory,”QuarterlyJournalofEconomics,2009,124(2),531–596.
Bénabou,RolandandJeanTirole,“BeliefinaJustWorldandRedistributivePolitics,”QuarterlyJournalof
Economics,2006,121(2),699–746.
Bever, Edward, “Witchcraft Prosecutions and the Decline of Magic,” Journal of Interdisciplinary History,
2009,40(2),263–293.
41

Bisin,AlbertoandThierryVerdier,“”Beyondthemeltingpot”: CulturalTransmission,Marriage,andthe
EvolutionofEthnicandReligiousTraits,”QuarterlyJournalofEconomics,2000,115(3),955–988.
and ,“OntheJointDynamicsofCultureandInstitutions,”2017. NBERWorkingpaperNo.23375.
Bowles,SamuelS.,“GroupCompetition,ReproductiveLeveling,andtheEvolutionofHumanAltruism,”
Science,2006,314(5805),1569–1572.
Boyd, Robert and Peter J. Richerson, Culture and the Evolutionary Process, University of Chicago Press,
1988.
andPeterJRicherson,TheOriginandEvolutionofCultures,OxfordUniversityPress,2005.
Breza, Emily, Arun Chandrasekhar, Tyler McCormack, and Mengjie Pan, “Using Aggregated Relational
Data to Feasibly Identify Network Structure without Network Data,” American Economic Review, 2020,
110(8),2454–2484.
Brooks, Robert C., Daniel Russo-Batterham, and Khandis R. Blake, “Incel Activity on Social Media
LinkedtoLocalMatingEcology,”PsychologicalScience,2022,33(2),249–258.
Buggle, Johannes C. and Ruben Durante, “Climate Risk, Cooperation and the Co-Evolution of Culture
andInstitutions,”EconomicJournal,012021,131(637),1947–1987.
Carvalho,Jean-Paul,“Veiling,”QuarterlyJournalofEconomics,2013,128(1),337–370.
and Michael Sacks, “The Economics of Religious Communities,” JournalofPublicEconomics, 2021, 201,
104481.
and ,“Radicalization,”2021. Workingpaper.
Cavalli-Sforza, Luigi Luca and Marcus W. Feldman, Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A Quantitative
Approach,Princeton: PrincetonUniversityPress,1981.
Chinoy, Sahil, Nathan Nunn, Sandra Sequeira, and Stefanie Stantcheva, “Zero-Sum Thinking and the
RootsofU.S.PoliticalDivides,”2023. Workingpaper.
Clark, Gregory, “Productivity Growth without Technical Change in European-Agriculture before 1850,”
JournalofEconomicHistory,1987,47(2),419–432.
Comaroff, Jean and John Comaroff, “Privatizing the Millennium: New Protestant Ethics and the Spirits
ofCapitalisminAfrica,andElsewhere,”AfricaSpectrum,2000,pp.293–312.
Cooper,BenandChrisWallace,“GroupselectionandtheEvolutionofAltruism,”OxfordEconomicPapers,
2004,56(2),307–330.
Ely,JeffreyC.,“Kludged,”AmericanEconomicJournal: Microeconomics,2011,3(3),210–231.
andOkanYilankaya,“NashEquilibriumandtheEvolutionofPreferences,”JournalofEconomicTheory,
2001,97(2),255–272.
Enke, Benjamin, “Kinship, Cooperation, and the Evolution of Moral Systems,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics,2019,134(2),953–1019.
Esponda,IgnacioandDemianPouzo,“Berk–NashEquilibrium: AFrameworkforModelingAgentswith
MisspecifiedModels,”Econometrica,2016,84(3),1093–1130.
Fernandez,Raquel,“Women,WorkandCulture,”JournaloftheEuropeanEconomicAssociation,2007,5(2–3),
305–332.
Fernández, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli, “Culture: An empirical investigation of beliefs, work, and
fertility,”AmericanEconomicJournal: Macroeconomics,2009,1(1),146–177.
Flouri,Eirini,“AnIntegratedModelofConsumerMaterialism: CanEconomicSocializationandMaternal
ValuesPredictMaterialisticAttitudesinAdolescents?,”JournalofSocio-Economics,1999,28(6),707–724.
Foster,GeorgeM.,TraditionalCultures,andtheImpactofTechnologicalChange,NewYork: Harper,1962.
,“PeasantSocietyandtheImageofLimitedGood,”AmericanAnthropologist,1965,67(2),293–315.
,Tzintzuntzan;MexicanPeasantsinaChangingWorld,NewYork: LittleBrown&Company,1967.
,“ASecondLookatLimitedGood,”AnthropologicalQuarterly,1972,45(2),57–64.
Frank, Robert H., “If Homo Economicus Could Choose his Own Utility Function, Would he Want One
withaConscience?,”AmericanEconomicReview,1987,pp.593–604.
, Passions Within Reason: The Strategic Role of the Emotions, New York and London: WW Norton & Co,
1988.
Freeman, Dena, Pentecostalism and Development: Churches, NGOs and Social Change in Africa, Palgrave
Macmillan,2012.
Gershman,Boris,“TheTwoSidesofEnvy,”JournalofEconomicGrowth,2014,19(4),407–438.
, “The Economic Origins of the Evil Eye Belief,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2015, 110,
119–144.
,“WitchcraftBeliefsandtheErosionofSocialCapital: EvidencefromSub-SaharanAfricaandbeyond,”
42

JournalofDevelopmentEconomics,2016,120,182–208.
, “Witchcraft Beliefs as a Cultural Legacy of the Atlantic Slave Trade: Evidence from Two Continents,”
EuropeanEconomicReview,2020,122(3),103362.
, “Witchcraft Beliefs Around the World: An Exploratory Analysis,” PLoSONE, November 2022, 17 (11),
e0276872.
, “Witchcraft Beliefs, Social Relations, and Development,” Handbook of Labor, Human Resources and
PopulationEconomics,2022,pp.1–30.
,“WitchcraftBeliefsandSubjectiveWell-Being,”2023. Workingpaper,AmericanUniversity.
Giuliano, Paola, “Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin Matter?,” Journal of the
EuropeanEconomicAssociation,2007,5(5),927–952.
andNathanNunn,“UnderstandingCulturalPersistenceandChange,”ReviewofEconomicStudies,2021,
88(4),1541–1581.
Grosjean, Pauline and Rishabh Khattar, “It’s Raining Men! Hallelujah? The Long-Run Consequences of
Male-BiasedSexRatios,”ReviewofEconomicStudies,2018,86(2),723–754.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange,” Quarterly
JournalofEconomics,2009,124(3),1095–1131.
, , and , “Long-Term Persistence,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2016, 14 (6), 1401–
1436.
Guriev,SergeiandEliasPapaioannou,“ThePoliticalEconomyofPopulism,”JournalofEconomicLiterature,
September2022,60(3),753–832.
Güth, W. and M. Yaari, “An Evolutionary Approach to Explain Reciprocal Behavior in a Simple Strategic
Game,” in U. Witt, ed., Explaining Process and Change—Approaches to Evolutionary Economics, University
ofMichiganPress,1992.
Hamilton,WilliamD.,“TheGeneticalEvolutionofSocialBehaviourII,”JournalofTheoreticalBiology,1964,
7(1),17–52.
Heifetz, Aviad, Chris Shannon, and Yossi Spiegel, “What to Maximize if You Must,” Journal ofEconomic
Theory,2007,133(1),31–57.
Henrich, Joseph, “Cultural Group Selection, Coevolutionary Processes and Large-Scale Cooperation,”
JournalofEconomicBehavior&Organization,2004,53(1),3–35.
, “The Evolution of Innovation-Enhancing Institutions,” in Stephen J. Shennan and Michael J. O’Brien,
eds., Innovation in Cultural Systems: Contributions in Evolutionary Anthropology, MIT Press, 2009, pp. 99–
120.
,TheWEIRDestPeopleintheWorld: HowtheWestbecamepsychologicallypeculiarandparticularlyprosperous,
NewYork: Farrar,StrausandGiroux,2020.
, MaciejChudek, andRobertBoyd, “TheBigManMechanism: HowPrestigeFostersCooperationand
Creates Prosocial leaders,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2015, 370
(1683).
Hersch,JonathanandHans-JoachimVoth,“SweetDiversity: ColonialGoodsandtheWelfareGainsfrom
GlobalTrade,”ExplorationsinEconomicHistory,2022,86(2),101468.
Horrell, Sara and Jane Humphries, “Women’s Labour Force Participation and the Transition to the Male
BreadwinnerFamily,1790–1865,”EconomicHistoryReview,1995,48(1),89–117.
Howes, Anton, “The Spread of Improvement: Why Innovation Accelerated in Britain 1547–1851,” 2016.
Workingpaper.
Humphries, Jane, “Childhood and Child Labour in the British Industrial Revolution,” Economic History
Review,2013,66(2),395–418.
Iannaccone, Laurence R., “Sacrifice and Stigma: Reducing Free-Riding in Cults, Communes, and other
Collectives,”JournalofPoliticalEconomy,1992,100(2),271–291.
Laslett,PeterandRichardWall,HouseholdandFamilyinPastTime,CambridgeUniversityPress,1972.
Macfarlane,Alan,WitchcraftinTudorandStuartEngland,London: Routledge,1999.
Mann,CharlesC.,1493,NewYork: Knopf,2012.
Massari, Filippo and Jonathan Newton, “Learning and Equilibrium in Misspecified Models,” 2020.
Workingpaper.
McClelland,DavidC.,TheAchievingSociety,NewYork: D.VanNostrandCompany,1961.
McCloskey,DeirdreNansen,BourgeoisVirtues: EthicsforAgeofCommerce,Chicago: UniversityofChicago
Press,2006.
,BourgeoisDignity: WhyEconomicsCan’tExplaintheModernWorld,Chicago: UniversityofChicagoPress,
43

2010.
, Bourgeois Equality: How Ideas, Not Capital or Institutions, Enriched the World, Chicago: University of
ChicagoPress,2016.
Michel, Jean Baptiste, Yuan Kui Shen, Aviva Presser Aiden, Adrian Veres, Matthew K. Gray, The
Google Books Team, Joseph P. Pickett, Dale Hoiberg, Dan Clancy, Peter Norvig, Jon Orwant, Steven
Pinker,MartinA.Nowak,andErezLibermanAiden,“QuantitativeAnalysisofCultureUsingMillions
ofDigitizedBooks,”Science,2010,331(6014),176–182.
Mokyr,Joel,ACultureofGrowth: TheOriginsoftheModernEconomy,Princeton: PrincetonUniversityPress,
2016.
Norenzayan, Ara, Big Gods: How Religion Transformed Cooperation and Conflict, Princeton University Press,
2013.
Nunn, Nathan and Leonard Wantchekon, “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa,”
AmericanEconomicReview,2011,101(7),3221–3252.
andNancyQian,“TheColumbianExchange: AHistoryofDisease,Food,andIdeas,”JournalofEconomic
Perspectives,2010,24(2),163–188.
and , “The Potato’s Contribution to Population and Urbanization: Evidence from a Historical
Experiment,”QuarterlyJournalofEconomics,2011,126(2),593–650.
and Raul Sanchez de la Sierra, “Why Being Wrong Can Be Right: Magical Warfare Technologies and
thePersistenceofFalseBeliefs,”AmericanEconomicReviewPapers&Proceedings,2017,107(5),582–687.
Ok,EfeA.andFernandoVega-Redondo,“OntheEvolutionofIndividualisticPreferences: AnIncomplete
InformationScenario,”JournalofEconomicTheory,2001,97(2),231–254.
Pechenick, Eitan Adam, Christopher M. Danforth, and Peter Sheridan Dodds, “Characterizing the
Google Books Corpus: Strong Limits to Inferences of Socio-Cultural and Linguistic Evolution,” PLoS
ONE,2015,10(10),e0137041.
Platteau,Jean-Philippe,Institutions,SocialNorms,andEconomicDevelopment,Vol.1,PsychologyPress,2000.
Ranger, Terence O. and T. O. Ranger, Evangelical Christianity and Democracy in Africa, Oxford University
Press,2008.
Sandel,MichaelJ.,TheTyrannyofMerit: What’sBecomeoftheCommonGood?,PenguinUK,2020.
Sandholm,WilliamH.,PopulationGamesandEvolutionaryDynamics,Cambridge: MITpress,2010.
Schelling,ThomasC.,TheStrategyofConflict,Cambridge: HarvardUniversityPress,1960.
Schulz, Jonathan F., Duman Bahrami-Rad, Jonathan P. Beauchamp, and Joseph Henrich, “The Church,
IntensiveKinship,andGlobalPsychologicalVariation,”Science,2019,366(6466),eaau5141.
Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg, “The Diffusion of Development,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2009,124(2),469–529.
Tabellini, Guido, “Institutions and culture,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2008, 6 (2-3),
255–294.
Verdier, Thierry and Yves Zenou, “Cultural Leaders and the Dynamics of Assimilation,” Journal of
EconomicTheory,2018,175,374–414.
Voigtländer, Nico and Hans-Joachim Voth, “Persecution perpetuated: The Medieval Origins of Anti-
SemiticViolenceinNaziGermany,”QuarterlyJournalofEconomics,2012,127(3),1339–1392.
Voth, Hans-Joachim, “Time and Work in Eighteenth-Century London,” Journal of Economic History, 1998,
58(1),29–58.
Vries, Jan De, TheIndustriousRevolution: ConsumerBehaviorandTheHouseholdEconomy,1650tothepresent,
NewYork: CambridgeUniversityPress,2008.
Weber,Max,TheProtestantEthicandtheSpiritofCapitalism,London: UnwinHymanLimited,1930.
West, Stuart A., Ashleigh S. Griffin, and Andy Gardner, “Evolutionary Explanations for Cooperation,”
Currentbiology,2007,17(16),R661–R672.
Whelan,ChristopherT.,“Marginalization,Deprivation,andFatalismintheRepublicofIreland: Classand
UnderclassPerspectives,”EuropeanSociologicalReview,1996,12(1),33–51.
White, Cindel J. M., Michael Muthukrishna, and Ara Norenzayan, “Cultural Similarity among Coreli-
gionists within and between Countries,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2021, 118 (37),
e2109650118.
Wootton,David,InventionofScience,Penguin,2016.
Younes,NadjaandUlf-DietrichReips,“GuidelineforImprovingtheReliabilityofGoogleNgramStudies:
EvidencefromReligiousTerms,”PLoSONE,2019,14(3),e0213554.
44

Appendix (For Online Publication Only)
Appendix A. Mathematical Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1. Under a payoff monotone dynamic for two traits i and j that are present
(cid:104) (cid:105)
in the population, d qi > 0 if and only if F (q) > F (q).
dt qj i j
The cultural fitness of trait i is given by ( 4 ). Thus,
F
i
(q) > F
j
(q)
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
⇐⇒ (1−θ
i
) 1− 1
2
(1−θ
i
) A2−σα(1−θ
i
)A2 > (1−θ
j
) 1− 1
2
(1−θ
j
) A2−σα(1−θ
j
)A2.
(A1)
Recall that A > 0. Hence:
(i)Settingθ = 0,(A 1 )becomesθ < 2σα. Sincethisisindependentofthestate,part(i)follows
j i
immediately.
(ii) If θ is chosen to maximize the left-hand side of (A 1 ), then the growth rate of trait i will be
i
higher than any other trait. The unique maximizer is θ∗ = σα. Since this is independent of the
state, the share of such types will converge monotonically to one as long as q∗(0) > 0. □
Corollary 2 . Evolution of Approximately Optimal Demotivating Beliefs. Consider a regular
(cid:8) (cid:9)
environmentinwhichthesetofbeliefsisthediscretegridΘ = 0, 1, 2,...1 andwheretheinitialstate
∆ ∆
q(0) has full support on Θ.
If the set of beliefs is sufficiently fine (∆ large), cultural evolution selects a belief that is approximately
θ∗ = σα. That is, q (t) converges monotonically to one for some θ ∈ (cid:0) θ∗− 1,θ∗+ 1 (cid:1) .
i i ∆ ∆
Thisfollowsfromθ∗ beingtherelativeculturalfitnessmaximizingbeliefandthestrictconcav-
ity of F (q)−F (q) with respect to θ for all j ̸= i.
i j i
Proof of Proposition 2. Suppose θ > θ . Rearranging (A 1 ), F (q) > F (q) if and only if
i j i j
−1(θ −θ )+ 1θ (1−θ )− 1θ (1−θ )+σα(θ −θ ) > 0
2 i j 2 i i 2 j j i j
⇐⇒ −1(θ −θ )(θ +θ )+σα(θ −θ ) > 0
2 i j i j i j
⇐⇒ σα > 1(θ +θ ).
2 i j
Consider θ = θ +∆. For ∆ sufficiently small, the last condition becomes θ < σα. Therefore,
i j i
material welfare is strictly increasing in θ up to θ∗ = σα and strictly decreasing thereafter.
0
A

In addition, because F (q) −F (q) is proportional to approximately σα−θ for ∆ small,
i j i
material welfare is also strictly concave in θ. □
Proof of Proposition 3. Suppose θ > θ . Then
i j
Wˆ < Wˆ
i j
⇐⇒ 1(1−θ )2−σα(1−θ ) < 1(1−θ )2−σα(1−θ )
2 i i 2 j j
⇐⇒ 1[(1−θ )2−(1−θ )2] > σα[(1−θ )−(1−θ )]
2 j i j i
⇐⇒ 1[(1−θ )−(1−θ )][(1−θ )+(1−θ )] > σα[(1−θ )−(1−θ )]
2 j i j i j i
⇐⇒ 1[(1−θ )+(1−θ )] > σα
2 j i
⇐⇒ 1−σα > 1(θ +θ ). (A 2 )
2 i j
Consider θ = θ +∆. For ∆ sufficiently small, the last condition becomes θ < 1−σα.
i j i
Therefore,subjectivewell-beingisstrictlydecreasinginθforθ < 1−σαandincreasingotherwise.
In addition, because Wˆ − Wˆ is proportional to approximately θ − 1 + σα for ∆ small,
i j i
subjective well-being is also strictly convex in θ.
Finally, if θ = 0, then (A 2 ) becomes 1−σα > 1θ , which is satisfied for all θ ∈ [0,1] if σα < 1.
j 2 i i 2
□
NumericalresultsaccompanyingProposition3. Toillustratetherelationshipbetweensubjec-
tivewell-beingandtheintensityofdemotivatingbeliefs,wereportthelimitingvalueofsubjective
well-being as a function of θ for the case where the zero-sumness of the environment is α = 1/2.
This is shown in Figure A 1 . The two panels, each which assumes a different value of σ that are
fairly high ( 0 . 25 or 0 . 50 ), show that even when maxΘ > 1−σα, subjective well-being only rises
slightly for higher values of θ. This theoretical prediction matches the empirical results shown in
5 6
Figures and .
Proof of Proposition 4. By Corollary 2 , for any interior initial state and ∆ sufficiently large,
qk(t) converges monotonically to one, where θ is approximately σαk.
i i
First, this implies θk(t) converges to approximately σαk. The first result follows immediately.
Second, Xk(t) converges to approximately (cid:0) 1−σαk(cid:1)2 A2 and mean material welfare Wk(t)
converges to approximately
(cid:104) (cid:105)
(1−σαk) 1 −αk(cid:0) 1− 1σ (cid:1) A2.
2 2
1
A

FigureA1: Plotofsubjectivewell-beingWˆ ontheintensityofdemotivatingbeliefsθ,forα = 1/2,
A = 1, and a population-average belief ∑n q θ = 0.5.
k=1 k k
(a)σ=0.25 (b)σ=0.5
 
W W
0.0
0.0
-0.1 -0.1
-0.2 -0.2
-0.3 -0.3
θ θ
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Differentiating with respect to αk yields
(cid:104) (cid:105)
− 1−2σαk(cid:0) 1− 1σ (cid:1) A2,
2
which is negative for all αk ∈ [0,1).
Hence, each limit point is strictly decreasing in αk, thus establishing the results regarding
Xk(t) and Wk(t) for ∆ sufficiently large, as hypothesized.
Third, note that Wˆ k(t) converges to approximately (cid:0) 1−σαk(cid:1)(cid:2) 1 (cid:0) 1−σαk(cid:1) −αk(cid:3) A2. Differen-
2
tiating with respect to αk and dividing by A2 yields
(cid:104) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:105)
−σ 1 1−σαk −αk − 1σ(1−σαk)−(1−σαk).
2 2
Rearranging, this is negative if
αk < 11+σ,
σ2+σ
which holds for all αk ∈ [0,1] if σ ≤ 1.
2
Again, thelimitpointisstrictlydecreasinginαk forσ ≤ 1 orαk < 11+σ, thusestablishingthe
2 σ2+σ
result regarding Wˆ k(t) for ∆ and T sufficiently large, as hypothesized. □
NumericalresultsaccompanyingProposition4. Toillustratetherelationshipbetweensubjec-
tivewell-beingandthedegreeofzero-sumness,weplotthelimitingvalueofsubjectivewell-being
when all individuals hold the belief θ∗ = σαk, as a function of αk. This is shown in Figure A 2 .
Panel (a) depicts a case in which subjective well-being Wˆ k is strictly decreasing in αk on [0,1].
2
A

Panel (b) shows that even when Wˆ k is increasing in αk over part of the domain, the curve does
not change dramatically. In both cases, the subjective well-being curve becomes relatively flat for
high degrees of zero-sumness, αk. This matches the empirical results reported in Figure 2 .
Figure A2: Plot of subjective well-being Wˆ k on the degree to which the environment is zero-sum
αk, when A = 1 and all individuals hold the limiting belief θ∗ = σαk.
(a)σ=0.5 (b)σ=0.75
 
W W
0.4 0.4
0.2 0.2
0.0 0.0
-0.2 -0.2
α α
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Appendix B. Robustness of Theoretical Predictions to Alternative Formulations
I. Alternative Forms of Demotivation
We consider our predictions for alternative assumptions for how demotivating beliefs affect
payoffs.
First, suppose that demotivating beliefs enter the subjective payoff function as follows, dis-
counting the entire benefit:
Uˆ (x ,x ) = (1−θ )A (cid:2) √ x −α √ x (cid:3) − 1x . (B 3 )
i i j i i j 2 i
The optimal effort remains the same at x∗ = (1 − θ )2A2. Hence, material payoffs are
i i
unchanged and cultural evolution, which operates on material payoffs, is also unchanged. The
only differences are minor changes to the conditions for the comparative dynamics involving
3 4
subjective payoffs in Propositions and . The results are qualitatively unchanged.
Second, suppose instead that demotivating beliefs raise the cost of effort as follows:
Uˆ (x ,x ) = A (cid:2) √ x −α √ x (cid:3) − 1 x i . (B 4 )
i i j i j 21−θ
i
Again, the optimal effort remains the same at x∗ = (1−θ )2A2. Hence material payoffs and
i i
cultural evolution are unchanged.
3
B