NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BUILDING RESILIENT EDUCATION SYSTEMS:
EVIDENCE FROM LARGE-SCALE RANDOMIZED TRIALS IN FIVE COUNTRIES
Noam Angrist
Micheal Ainomugisha
Sai Pramod Bathena
Peter Bergman
Colin Crossley
Claire Cullen
Thato Letsomo
Moitshepi Matsheng
Rene Marlon Panti
Shwetlena Sabarwal
Tim Sullivan
Working Paper 31208
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31208
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2023
We are grateful to an incredible coalition of partners who enabled this multi-country response.
Implementing and research partners include: Youth Impact, J-PAL, Learning Collider
(supported by Schmidt Futures and Citadel), Oxford University, World Bank, Ministry of
Education, Science and Technology of Nepal, Teach for Nepal, Street Child, Department of
Education in the Philippines, IPA, Building Tomorrow, NewGlobe, Alokit, and Global School
Leaders. Funding partners include UBS Optimus Foundation, Mulago Foundation, Douglas B.
Marshall Foundation, Echidna Giving, Stavros Niarchos Foundation, Jacobs Foundation, JPAL
Innovation in Government Initiative, Northwestern’s ‘Economics of Nonprofits’ class, the Peter
Cundill Foundation, and the World Bank. Cullen received funding from the UKRI GCRF &
Oxford’s OPEN Fellowship. We thank Natasha Ahuja, Amy Jung, and Rachel Zhou who
provided excellent research assistance. Special thank you to implementation and research teams
including Nassreena Baddiri, Mariel Bayangos, Kshitiz Basnet, John Lawrence Carandang,
Clotilde de Maricourt, Pratik Ghimire, Faith Karanja, Manoj Karki, Karisha Cruz, Usha Limbu,
Roger Masapol, Edward Munyaneza, Sunil Poudel, Karthika Radhakrishnan-Nair, Pratigya
Regmi, Uttam Sharma, Swastika Shrestha, and Kishor Subedi. Thank you for thoughtful
comments from participants of various seminars and conferences: ASSA, BREAD, CSAE,
NEUDC, PacDev. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Noam Angrist, Micheal Ainomugisha, Sai Pramod Bathena, Peter Bergman, Colin
Crossley, Claire Cullen, Thato Letsomo, Moitshepi Matsheng, Rene Marlon Panti, Shwetlena
Sabarwal, and Tim Sullivan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Building Resilient Education Systems: Evidence from Large-Scale Randomized Trials in Five
Countries
Noam Angrist, Micheal Ainomugisha, Sai Pramod Bathena, Peter Bergman, Colin Crossley,
Claire Cullen, Thato Letsomo, Moitshepi Matsheng, Rene Marlon Panti, Shwetlena Sabarwal,
and Tim Sullivan
NBER Working Paper No. 31208
May 2023
JEL No. I20,I24,O15
ABSTRACT
Education systems need to withstand frequent shocks, including conflict, disease,
natural disasters, and climate events, all of which routinely close schools. During these
emergencies, alternative models are needed to deliver education. However, rigorous
evaluation of effective educational approaches in these settings is challenging and rare,
especially across multiple countries. We present results from large-scale randomized trials
evaluating the provision of education in emergency settings across five countries: India,
Kenya, Nepal, Philippines, and Uganda. We test multiple scalable models of remote
instruction for primary school children during COVID-19, which disrupted education for
over 1 billion schoolchildren worldwide. Despite heterogeneous contexts, results show that
the effectiveness of phone call tutorials can scale across contexts. We find consistently large
and robust effect sizes on learning, with average effects of 0.30-0.35 standard deviations. These
effects are highly cost-effective, delivering up to four years of high-quality instruction per
$100 spent, ranking in the top percentile of education programs and policies. In a subset of
trials, we randomized whether the intervention was provided by NGO instructors or government
teachers. Results show similar effects, indicating scalability within government systems. These
results reveal it is possible to strengthen the resilience of education systems, enabling
education provision amidst disruptions, and to deliver cost-effective learning gains across
contexts and with governments.
Noam Angrist Claire Cullen
Oxford University and Youth Impact Oxford University and Youth Impact
noam.angrist@bsg.ox.ac.uk, claire.cullen@bsg.ox.ac.uk
Micheal Ainomugisha Thato Letsomo
Building Tomorrow Youth Impact
micheal.ainomugisha@buildingtomorrow.org tletsomo@youth-impact.org
Sai Pramod Bathena Moitshepi Matsheng
Alokit Youth Impact
saipramod.bathena@alokit.org and Botswana National Youth Council
mmatsheng@youth-impact.org
Peter Bergman
Department of Economics Rene Marlon Panti
University of Texas at Austin Innovations for Poverty Action
116 Inner Campus Drive rmpanti@poverty-action.org
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER Shwetlena Sabarwal
peterbergman@utexas.edu World Bank, Washington DC
ssabarwal@worldbank.org
Colin Crossley
Youth Impact Tim Sullivan
ccrossley@youth-impact.org NewGlobe
tim.sullivan@newglobe.education

I Introduction
More than 2 billion people live in countries affected by emergencies that frequently disrupt educa-
tion. The causes of these disruptions are numerous and far-ranging, including rainy seasons, floods,
pollution, elections, teacher strikes, conflict, climate shocks, disease, and natural disasters. For
example, the spread of Ebola in West Africa in 2014 disrupted both education and health systems
(Christensen et al. 2021), closing school for 1.7 million children for 9 months in Sierra Leone. Mon-
soon rains and flooding in Bangladesh, India, and Nepal from 2017 to 2019 closed 15,000 schools.
Earthquakes in Pakistan, Haiti, and Nepal destroyed tens of thousands of schools.
While frequent and disruptive, education emergencies have historically been understudied. We
presentanewdatabasedocumentingjusthowfrequentanddisruptivesuchshockscanbe.1 Schools
close for lengthy periods during these emergencies, and learning loss can be substantial (Andrabi,
Daniels, and Das 2021; Lichand et al. 2022; Carlana, La Ferrara, and Lopez 2023). Resilient
education systems need to be able to withstand these shocks and continue to provide education.
International aid organizations refer to these situations as “education in emergencies.” Education
Cannot Wait, the United Nation’s Global Fund for education in emergencies, estimates that 222
million children are in active need of education in emergencies programs and policies.
Ideally, interventions that can promote learning in emergencies are low cost, simple to im-
plement, and quick to deploy. They should also yield high take-up across different geographies
and implementation models and should be targeted to children of diverse educational and cultural
backgrounds. Understanding which approaches can be effective across these diverse circumstances
requires multi-context, multi-model studies. However, rigorous evaluation of approaches to deliver
education in emergencies across contexts remains challenging and rare. Most evaluations have been
qualitative, with no multi-country, multi-model experimental studies to date.
In this paper, we evaluate a set of education in emergencies programs to promote learning
during large-scale school disruptions caused by COVID-19, which affected over 1 billion children
worldwide. We conduct five randomized controlled trials, including multiple delivery models, such
asNGOteacheraidesaswellasgovernmentteachers,totestscalabilitywithingovernmentsystems.
Our trials were conducted across five countries: India, Kenya, Nepal, Uganda, and the Philippines.
In all settings, schooling was disrupted, and several of the countries in our study experienced some
of the longest school closures in the world.
We use mobile phones to provide various educational interventions to primary school children.
Mobilephonesprovideaplatformthatcancheaplyreachstudentsatscaleinlow-resourcecontexts.
While less than 15 percent of households have access to the internet in low-income countries, over
1Figure 1 documents the extent of school disruption for a selected set of emergencies over the last two decades.
Notable examples include large earthquakes in Pakistan in 2005 and in Haiti in 2010, elections in Nepal in 2017 and
air pollution in 2021, Ebola in Liberia and Sierra Leone, floods in Bangladesh in 2007 and Monsoon rains in 2019,
prolonged droughts in Kenya in 2017, and foot and mouth disease in 2004 in Cambodia, among others. Conflicts
in countries ranging from Afghanistan, Colombia, Ethiopia, Syria, and Myanmar have also been documented with
substantial negative effects on education. For example, between 2015 and 2019 alone, more than 11,000 attacks on
schools were documented in at least 93 countries (GCPEA, Education under Attack 2020).
1

70 percent have access to mobile phones (Carvalho and Crawford 2020). Moreover, mobile phones
enable teachers to reach students at home even when school is disrupted, providing a resilient and
flexible modality to provide education during emergencies. One treatment included a set of SMS
messages, such as numeracy content provided weekly as well as nudges to engage in educational
activities. A second treatment provided additional weekly 20 minute phone call tutorials for eight
weeks. The educational pedagogy was as essential as the mobile phone platform. Phone calls
covered foundational numeracy and aimed to target instruction to student learning levels via low-
cost, high-frequencyassessments. Thisapproachbuildsoneffectivetargetedinstructionapproaches
both in-person and using technology (Banerjee et al. 2007; Banerjee et al. 2017; Muralidharan,
Singh, and Ganimian 2019; Duflo, Kiessel, and Lucas 2020).
A proof ofconcept in Botswana showed phone call tutorialswereeffectivein promotinglearning
during initial COVID-19 school disruptions (Angrist, Bergman, and Matsheng 2022). However,
questions remain on whether this approach can be scaled across contexts and when delivered by
governments – a pervasive challenge for social programs (List 2022; Mobarak 2022). This paper
addresses the critical question of which types of education in emergency approaches can improve
learning across a broad array of settings by conducting large randomized trials across five contexts
as well as comparing scalable models, such as NGO and government delivery.
Our results show consistently large and robust effect sizes of phone call tutorials on learning
across contexts, with average effects across all five countries of 0.30-0.35 standard deviations. We
find results are largest in countries that experienced the longest school closures: Uganda and the
Philippines. These results translate into large learning gains in absolute terms. In Uganda, for
example, less than 20 percent of grade 4 students can divide at baseline, but by endline, nearly
50 percent can. These gains fully recover learning losses in math and enable substantial progress
beyond status quo learning rates. On average, across all countries, we find a 65 percent increase in
the share of students who learn division. The effects are largest for students whose caregivers have
onlyaprimaryeducation(ratherthansecondaryandbeyond), suggestingthatresultsarestrongest
when there are fewer alternative educational support systems at home. Additional results show
positive effects of phone call tutorials on learning higher-order competencies, such as fractions.
Sincefractionswerenotdirectlytaughtduringtheintervention,thisprovidesevidencethatlearning
extendedbeyondfamiliaritywiththecontenttaught. Itfurtherrevealsdynamiccomplementarities,
with the benefits of learning basic numeracy accruing to learning additional skills (Cunha and
Heckman 2007).
We randomized whether the intervention was provided by NGO instructors or government
teachers in the Philippines and Nepal. The average effect of phone call tutorials on learning when
delivered by NGOs is 0.26 standard deviations and 0.31 when delivered by government teachers.
These results show similar and statistically indistinguishable effects, indicating that government
systems can effectively deliver these types of education in emergency responses. We also find high
engagement across sites ranging from 70 to 80 percent, revealing the scalability and robustness of
the approach even in disrupted and low-resource environments.
2

We further embedded a study randomly allocating a subset of government teachers to deliver
phonecalltutorialsinNepal. Thisexperimentalvariationenablesdetectionoftheimpactofdeliver-
ing the program on teacher beliefs and practices – an effect that could spill over into the education
system and persist beyond the intervention. Results shows teacher practices shift substantially;
teachers are 9.3 percentage points more likely to target their feedback to students’ learning level.
Teachers are also more likely to get parents involved in education. We further find large effects
on teacher perceptions that they were able to help students learn, as well as their desire to teach,
with a 15.8 percentage point gain in wanting to be a teacher if they could make the choice again.
These results suggest that delivering effective programs can unlock a virtuous cycle within gov-
ernment education systems, in turn motivating teachers to want to teach and to improve their
teaching practice. Of note, the teachers in this trial closely resemble the average primary school
teacher, suggesting government delivery results are likely to translate to a broad set of teachers in
the education system.2
In contrastto phonecall tutorials, theeffects of SMS messagesalone aremixed. On average, we
find a 0.08 standard deviation effect on learning. While these effects are positive and statistically
significantwhenpooledacrosscontexts,theyarenotconsistentlystatisticallysignificantbycountry.
Average effects aredriven by substantial impacts in Uganda, with a 0.20 standard deviation effect
that is significant at the 99 percent level, as well as effects in the Philippines, with an effect of
0.09 that is significant at the 90 percent level; there is no effect in Kenya or Nepal. These results
suggest that SMS messages can work in contexts with the largest need, such as Uganda and the
Philippines, but not in all contexts. Live phone call instruction, on the other hand, appears to best
strike the balance of being intensive enough to deliver sustained impact across diverse contexts
while remaining cheap and scalable.
Beyond the core set of randomized trials that occurred during COVID-19 school disruptions, an
additional education emergency took place during the course of the study: a devastating typhoon
in the Philippines that destroyed 4,000 classrooms and disrupted learning for 2 million children
(OCHA 2022). The interaction between the areas affected by the typhoon and randomization
to phone call tutorials and SMS messages resulted in a quasi-experiment. The results provide
evidence on the disruptive effects of the typhoon on learning and approaches to stem learning
losses in this additional education emergency context. Results show that the typhoon reduced
learning by approximately 0.11-0.23 standard deviations. Despite the detrimental effects of the
typhoon, phone call tutorials continued to be effective, with 0.26 standard deviation gains relative
to the control group, although SMS messages alone were not enough to stem learning losses. These
results reveal that phone call tutorial effectiveness persists across multiple education emergencies.
We also contribute to the development of remote learning assessments. High-frequency remote
2Teachers in the study are likely representative of a broader set of teachers since all were government teachers,
teachers were directly requested to participate through government protocols by the Ministry of Education, and 80
percentofteachersexpressedinterestintheprogramandwereenrolledintotheeligiblepoolforthestudy. Moreover,
given in this trial we introduce further randomization, with teachers randomly assigned to implementation, the set
of implementers are representative of the overall eligible pool of teachers.
3

assessmentdataenabledreal-timetargetingofinstructiontostudentlevelsaswellastheevaluation
of program effectiveness. Even prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, phone calls have been used
increasingly for household surveys, such as the World Bank Living Measurement Study (LSMS)
and UNICEF’s Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS). We conduct five validity checks on high-
frequency, low cost and scalable learning assessments via phone. A first check compares in-person
to phone-based assessment for the exact same set of students in Kenya. We find no statistically
distinguishable difference between these two modes of assessments. An additional test included
back-checks, with a random subset of students tested twice on the same competencies. We find a
strong relationship as expected. We further randomize various problems of the same proficiency
(e.g.,fourdifferentquestionstomeasure2-digitadditionwithcarryover). Resultsshownodifference
by question, showing accurate estimates of latent ability. Finally, we include a real-effort question
to disentangle effects of the intervention on effort on the test, which has been shown to affect test
scores during in-person exams (Gneezy et al. 2019), versus cognitive skills. We find no statistically
significant effects of the interventions on effort, revealing that learning gains are indeed a function
of cognitive skills.
Inadditiontoassessingimpactonlearningoutcomes,weexamineimpactsonbeliefsanddemand
fortheintervention. Wefindparentsandchildrenbothupdatetheirbeliefsbroadlyinlinewithtrue
learning progress. These results build on a growing literature exploring the importance of parents
knowing their child’s learning level, enabling them to better support their education (Bergman
2021). In addition, caregivers demand the program. At endline, 96 percent of parents state they
would like to receive the phone call tutorials, which increases even further in the phone call tutorial
treatment group, as does willingness to pay for the program.
We also examine impacts on non-cognitive skills, such as perseverance and ambition. We adapt
a questionnaire used by Carlana and La Ferrara (2021) for related remote tutoring interventions.
While we don’t find statistically significant effects for SMS messages on their own, we find sizable
effects on both of these outcomes in the phone call tutorials, with up to a 29 percent increase
in ambition. We further find positive effects on measures of well-being, such as enjoying school
and worrying less. A growing literature highlights the importance of both cognitive as well as
non-cognitive skills for future life outcomes (Jackson 2018). These results provide experimental
evidence that some educational interventions, such as the phone call tutorials, can promote both.
This study contributes to a nascent experimental literature on education in emergencies. Sub-
stantial research has taken place on this topic, however much of it has been qualitative or with
small samples. One exception is a randomized trial where an NGO provided schooling in rural
areas of conflict-affected regions in Afghanistan and found large effects on learning and closing of
gender gaps (Burde and Linden 2013). We build on this literature by providing evidence from
randomized controlled trials across multiple contexts and for government delivery models. We also
expand the literature by evaluating alternative, scalable forms of education beyond traditional in-
person schools, such as remote learning, which is the only option during many emergencies. In
addition, a large literature documents the cost of school disruptions, such as teacher strikes (Jaume
4

and Willen 2019), earthquakes (Andrabi et al. 2021), schools holidays (Cooper et al. 1996), and
COVID-19 (Bacher-Hicks et al. 2021; Jack et al. 2021; Patrinos et al. 2022; Moscoviz and Evans
2022; Carlana, La Ferrara, and Lopez 2023). However, less evidence exists on effective approaches
to stem these learning losses. We contribute evidence on scalable solutions to stem learning losses
across multiple contexts and through government delivery models. This relates to an emerging
evidence base on education interventions tested during COVID-19 (Carlana and La Ferrara 2021;
Hassan et al. 2021; Crawfurd et al. 2021; Schueler and Rodriguez-Segura 2021; Lichand et al 2022;
Hevia et al. 2022; Angrist et al. 2022).
We also contribute to a growing literature on scale. Recent examples show the extent of the
scaling challenge, with many social programs that initially worked in a proof-of-concept phase no
longer delivering impact when scaled or delivered by governments (Mobarak 2022; List 2022).3
In contrast with much of the existing literature, our results identify an education approach that
can scale across contexts and within government systems. One reason might be that we leverage
a particularly scalable technology: mobile phones. Few technologies have as widespread access
across so many diverse contexts (Aker and Mbiti 2010; Aker et al. 2012). A second reason may
be the generalizability of the underlying mechanisms tested in our study, which relate to other
best practices in education. For example, tutoring has been shown to be one of the most effective,
althoughexpensive,approachestoimprovinglearninginhigh-incomesettings(Nickow,Oreopoulos,
and Quan, 2020; Robinson and Loeb 2021). The phone call tutorials in our study provide a cheap
and scalable version of tutoring applicable in low- and middle-income contexts. In addition, since
the phone calls are one-on-one and have frequent learning assessments, they enable highly targeted
instruction to every child’s learning level, another educational approach shown to consistently
improve learning outcomes (Banerjee et al. 2017; Muralidharan, Singh, and Ganimian 2019; Duflo,
Kiessel, and Lucas 2022).
In addition to identifying a scalable approach, our study advances the scale literature by con-
ducting randomized trials across five countries in a literature where less than 1 percent of RCTs
in a set of top economics journal articles are multi-country studies.4 Some argue that while RCTs
address internal validity concerns, they might not address important external validity questions
(Pritchett and Sandefur 2015). This study highlights the potential for randomized trials to be con-
ducted and coordinated across contexts – addressing both internal and external validity challenges
simultaneously. While rare, this approach is gaining traction, with another prominent example
3One example includes a contract teacher program in Kenya where effects dissipated when delivered by the
government(Boldetal. 2018). Anotherexampleincludesthediminishingeffectsofearlychildhoodprogramsasthey
were scaled up from an efficacy trial (“proof of concept”) in Jamaica, to a pilot in Colombia, to an at-scale program
in Peru (Araujo, Rubio-Codina, and Schady 2021).
4Out of a set of 400 papers in development from 2019 and 2021 in a set of top economics journals, 19 percent
were RCTs; of those that were RCTs, about 1 percent were multi-country studies. The set of journals considered
includes the Top 5 economic journals (American Economic Review, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Econometrica,
JournalofPoliticalEconomy,andReviewofEconomicStudies)andothertop-tiergeneralinterestjournals(Reviewof
Economics and Statistics, Economic Journal, Journal of the European Economic Association, and all four American
Economic Journal journals), and a top field journal (the Journal of Development Economics). Other prominent
multi-country RCT efforts include the evaluations of Graduation programs (Banerjee et al. 2015) and Teaching at
the Right Level (Banerjee et al. 2017) and some early grade reading interventions (Lucas et al. 2014).
5

including a multi-country study on microcredit (Banerjee et al. 2015). Finally, by evaluating the
effectiveness of government delivery with experimental variation relative to NGO delivery across
multiple contexts, we assess questions of scalability within government systems.
Third, we contribute to the global education literature, with a focus on improving learning
outcomes. Over the past few decades, education enrollments have improved worldwide yet learning
outcomes have barely budged (Pritchett 2013; World Bank 2018; Angrist et al. 2021). Estimates
from our baseline survey, for example, show that 36 percent of students in grades 3 to 5 could
not do any basic operations and only 7 percent of student could divide, falling well behind grade-
level curriculum expectations. Growing evidence reveals that popular input-only reforms, such
as general teacher training, provision of computers, or school grants, are not enough to improve
learning. In contrast, approaches that improve the qualityof teaching, suchas teaching at theright
level and structured pedagogy, can generate large improvements in learning (Kremer, Brannen,
and Glennerster 2013; Ganimian and Murnane 2016; Glewwe and Muralidharan 2016; Eble et al.
2021). The learning gains from the phone-based tutorials tested in this study can deliver up to
4 years of high-quality schooling per $100 spent. These effects rank in the top percentile of cost-
effective interventions, benchmarked relative to 150 education policies and programs (Angrist et
al. 2020). This reveals the potential of the approach to cost-effectively improve learning across
low-and middle-income contexts and to help address a persistent global learning crisis.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II provides context and presents new
data documenting how frequently education in emergencies occur. Section III describes the data
collected across studies and sites. Section IV describes the experimental design and empirical
strategy. Section V includes the results and cost-effectiveness analysis, and Section VI concludes.
II Context
II.A A global learning crisis, exacerbated by COVID-19
While schooling rates have increased worldwide, students face a global learning crisis, with many
students in school but learning very little (World Bank 2018). In our baseline survey, for exam-
ple, only 38 percent of students could subtract, 25 percent could multiply, and only 7 percent
could divide, falling well behind curriculum expectations. COVID-19 school closures exacerbated
this global learning crisis, with school closures forcing over 1.6 billion learners out of classrooms.
These types of school closures result in large learning losses which have been documented in North
America, Western Europe, Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa. The lasting economic toll of learning
loss is enormous, estimated at over 20 trillion dollars (Azevedo et al. 2020). This pre-existing and
exacerbated learning crisis necessitates effective educational approaches that can rapidly improve
learning outcomes during and beyond emergencies.
6

II.B Education in Emergencies
COVID-19 school closures are a recent large-scale example of disruptions to schooling. However,
emergencies that affect education are all too common, and affect many people every year. We
present novel data documenting the extent of school closures over the past two decades for a subset
of countries. We codify information from various sources, including reports from international aid
organizations such as Save the Children and UNICEF, the United Nations Office for the Coordi-
nation of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), as well as national and international news reports.
Figure 1 plots an index of the length of school closures and number of people affected by shocks
that have disrupted schooling by country and year. We observe that large-scale disasters affect
many people, occur in many countries, and happen at high frequency. The spread of multiple
diseases has shuttered schools, such as Swine Flu in China in 2009, Foot and Mouth in Cambodia
in 2012, and Ebola in 2014 in Sierra Leone. In 2019, smog and air pollution from wildfires closed
schools around Mexico City. In 2020, a cyclone in Vanuatu destroyed and damaged 885 schools.
Extremeclimateeventsoftendisruptschooling,suchaswatershortagesinZimbabwein2004aswell
as in Venezuela in 2017. Floods and rainy seasons perhaps most routinely cause widespread school
disruption. For example, in 2017, monsoons and flooding closed and damaged over 10,000 schools
across Malaysia, India, Bangladesh and Nepal. In Pakistan, nearly 8,000 schools were damaged
in 2010. A more recent crisis in Pakistan in 2023, which will be included in an extension of this
dataset, disrupted 34,000 schools. As climate change-related shocks increase, school disruptions
are likely to occur with ever great frequency and consequence, stunting students’ education.
In recognition of the importance of addressing shocks to education, the United Nations es-
tablished a billion-dollar Global Fund called “Education Cannot Wait” in 2016 at the World Hu-
manitarian Summit to support learning in emergencies and protracted crises. Multiple additional
international aid structures also exist to support education in emergencies. For example, the Inter-
agency Network for Education in Emergencies (INEE) was established to connect and share best
practices amongst more than 18,000 members from 4,000 institutions globally working in education
in emergencies, including the United Nations, governments, NGOs, teachers, and students.
A recent prominent review by Burde et al. (2015) on education in emergencies highlights a lack
of research on improving education quality, as well as a major gap in experimental studies. They
identify the use of mobile phone technology to deliver educational instruction as a particularly
promising yet underutilized approach, and recommend future experimental research in this area.
7

Figure 1: Documenting a Set of Education in Emergencies (2002-2022)
Zimbabwe Water shortage
Venezuela No water
Vanuatu
No water
Vanuata
Uganda
Thailand
South Sudan
South Korea
Somalia
Sierra Leone Ebola
Philippines
Pakistan Earthquake floods
Election air pollution
Nigeria
Nepal
Mexico smog
Malaysia
Malawi
Liberia
Jamaica
floods
Indonesia
India
Volcano
Haiti Earthquake
Fiji
Ethiopia
China Swine flu
Cambodia Foot & Mouth
Bolivia
Bangladesh floods Monsoon rains
Afghanistan
2002 3002 4002 5002 6002 7002 8002 9002 0102 1102 2102 3102 4102 5102 6102 7102 8102 9102 0202 1202 2202
Year
Notes: This figure plots an index of the length of school closures and number of people affected by shocks that have
disrupted schooling by country and year. The larger the bubble the larger either the length of school closure or the
numberofpeopleaffected,orboth. MoreinformationonthedatabasecompilationisavailableintheAppendix.
Source: CompiledschoolclosureinformationbasedonpressreleasesoftheUnitedNation’sOfficefortheCoordination
ofHumanitarianAffairs(OCHA)ReliefWeb,WorldVision,UNICEF,theBBC,andotherlocaloutlets.
II.C An Overview of the Study: Randomized Trials Across Five Countries
Our evaluation of education in emergencies interventions took place in the context of COVID-19
school closures across five countries: India, Kenya, Nepal, the Philippines, and Uganda. In total,
over16,000householdswereenrolledinthismulti-countryevaluation. Ineachhousehold,aprimary
school student and a caregiver were identified to receive the intervention. We asked households to
nominate the main caregiver who provides educational support to their child: 53.3 percent of
nominated caregivers were mothers, 17.4 percent were fathers, 17.3 percent were siblings, and 3.2
percent were grandparents. 24 percent of nominated caregivers had completed primary education
or less. Students were enrolled in grades 3 to 5, with one exception in Kenya where students were
in grades 1 and 2. The trials took place between December 2020 and July 2022. Appendix Table
A6 includes a summary of key facts per country trial, and Figure A3 in the Appendix shows a
detailed timeline. Appendix Figure A5 maps the location of the children’s schools within several of
8

the study countries; it shows study participants are distributed across wide areas in most countries,
and in some cases, are relatively nationally representative.
Our evaluation includes multiple education in emergencies programs and delivery models. We
leverage mobile phones – a high-access, low cost and scalable way to reach students and their
caregivers when school is out of session – to provide various educational interventions over the
course of eight weeks.5 One treatment includes a set of SMS messages, such as numeracy content
provided weekly, as well as nudges to engage in educational activity. A second treatment added
weekly one-on-one 20-minute phone call tutorials. Phone calls covered foundational numeracy and
aimed to target instruction to student learning levels via light-touch, high-frequency assessments
conducted on a weekly basis. Using the assessment, instructors led students through foundational
numeracypracticeproblemstohelpthemmasteraddition,subtraction,multiplication,anddivision.
For example, students who did not know addition would be taught addition, while students who
knew addition but not subtraction would be taught subtraction. Calls were made to caregivers
who invited the child in their household to join the program, and would then hand them the phone
or use speakerphone for the tutorial session. The implementation ratio of students to teachers
was approximately 20:1 for teachers implementing the program full-time, and 5:1 for teachers
implementing the program part-time. The phone call program is called “ConnectEd”, highlighting
phone calls’ ability to connect students to quality education even during school disruption.
In addition, we tested several scalable delivery models, including NGO and government teacher
delivery, which were randomized within a country. The government delivery arms were conducted
with government teachers. They further included headquarter ministry sign off, as well as regional
government engagement, including joining training, engagement with routine monitoring data, and
periodic mid and high-level steering committee meetings. Some delivery models hired teacher aides
to deliver instruction, while others used teachers.6
We include a few descriptive statistics to describe our samples. In our five-country sample, the
median student is in grade 3 and 51 percent of students are female. On baseline student learning
proficiency, 36 percent of students did not know any basic operations, 27 percent were at addition
level (meaning they had ‘mastered’ addition and were being taught the next level), 12 percent
were at subtraction level, 17 percent at multiplication level, and 7 percent at division.7 These low
learning levels are well below grade-level curriculum expectations. Moreover, detailed monitoring
data shows high week-on-week engagement across sites ranging from 70 to 80 percent, revealing
the scalability and robustness of the approach even in disrupted and low-resource environments, as
shown in Figure A1. We also find sustained rates of engagement across all eight weeks of phone
5Thesetypesofmobilephone-basedinterventionshaveshowntobeabletocloseparent-childinformationfrictions
and improve learning in high-income settings (Bergman 2021) as well as low and middle-income settings (Angrist,
Bergman, and Matsheng 2022).
6Note: weusetheterms‘teacher’and‘teacheraide’toreflectseveraltypesoftrainedteachinginstructors. Those
referredtoas‘teachers’arecurrentlyemployedprimaryschoolteachers. ‘Teacheraides’includecommunityeducation
volunteers as well as instructors trained to be teachers but currently employed by NGOs. Details of implementer
types are discussed in each country section below.
7ThisexcludesKenya,whichistheonlycountrywherewedonothavebaselinestudentleveldataidenticaltothe
other countries broken down by specific proficiency, though we have baseline test score data on a 100-point scale.
9

call tutorials staying within a narrow range of high engagement.
This set of five trials sought to scale an approach first tested in Botswana in 2020 (Angrist,
Bergman, and Matsheng 2022). The original Botswana trial tested the impact of a phone based
tutoring program that had been developed during the first few months of COVID-19. The NGO
Youth Impact, one of the largest in the country, developed a phone call that targeted tutoring for
remote settings when schools were disrupted. The Botswana study – a tightly controlled initial
proof-of-concept – found the program to be cost-effective, resulting in a 0.12 standard deviation
improvementinlearningoutcomes. Thepresentstudysoughttotestthescalabilityoftheapproach
across five country contexts and a variety of implementer types, including scalability through gov-
ernment delivery models. A rich array of data was collected with response rates above 80 percent,
enabling both high-quality evaluation and detailed exploration of outcomes and mechanisms.
In all contexts, the NGO that first developed the program, Youth Impact, provided support to
each of the implementing partners in new countries to help train their staff in the program, as well
asprovidemonitoringtools,training,andtechnicalassistance. Supporttypicallyinvolvedproviding
the curriculum and advice if any adaptations were needed for the local context (for example, these
ranged from careful language translation to adapting material if place value was taught differently
in new contexts); a several-hour training-of-trainers session; monitoring surveys and advice on how
tousethemonitoringdatatools; andoccasionalmeetingsduringimplementationtogiveadviceand
troubleshoot. All interactions between the research team and implementing partners took place
remotely over video or voice calls. Youth Impact supported partners across countries, providing
a coordinating mechanism to share lessons across trials. However, Youth Impact had no prior
presence in these countries, showcasing a replicable model for scale-up in new settings.
II.D Specific Country Context for Each Trial
For each country context, we describe the status quo learning levels and COVID-19 education
context, theimplementingpartnerandsampledescription, andtheinstructortype. Ineachsetting,
learninggapsarelargebothbeforeandduringCOVID-19,showinganeedformorehigh-qualityand
scalableeducationalinstruction. Inaddition,thetypicalgovernmentresponsestoschooldisruption,
suchasradioandTV,haveengagementratesbelow30percent. Thishighlightstheneedforremote
approaches which can yield higher engagement, such as phone call tutorials. Moreover, this puts
in context the significance of the high engagement we find of the phone call tutorials in our study,
consistentlyreachingover70to80percent. Finally,thediversesettingsandimplementationmodels
in the study, spanning five countries as well as NGO and government delivery, enables us to assess
the scalability of targeted phone tutoring across a wide array of contexts and delivery models.
II.D.1 India
Prior to COVID-19, India placed near the bottom of all countries taking the Program for Inter-
national Student Assessment (PISA), ranking 72nd out of of 73 countries. In our baseline survey,
10

only 24 percent of the Grade 3-5 students in the sample could do division, showing a substantial
need for additional foundational numeracy instruction.
During COVID-19, schooling was significantly disrupted in India. In our sample in Telangana
state, primary schools were closed for the duration of the program (UNESCO 2023). In response
to the crisis, the government encouraged households to access educational materials shared on TV,
online, and radio.
The implementing NGO in India was Alokit, a social impact non-governmental organisation
basedinHyderabad, whichispartofaninternationalnetworkoforganizationscalledGlobalSchool
Leaders. Alokit provides education and school leadership-related programming in schools. The
program supported government efforts to ensure all primary school students achieve foundational
numeracy skills.
Alokit had pre-existing relationships with government officials and study schools, nearly all of
which were government residential schools. The majority of the students were from rural areas and
belong to India’s most marginalised caste communities. Between two to four teachers were selected
from each school to tutor the students. The phone calls were delivered by school teachers based
in the same schools as the students in the study. Calls were conducted in either of two languages,
English or Telugu, the most common language in the state.
II.D.2 Kenya
Although Kenyan students have higher foundational learning levels than most other countries in
Sub-Saharan Africa, learning outcomes still lag far behind those in higher-income countries (World
Bank 2020). In third grade, only 47 percent of Kenyan students could solve a second grade math-
ematics problem (Uwezo, 2016), and 36 percent of grade 2 and 3 students achieved a minimum
proficiency level in mathematics (UNESCO, 2016).
By December 2020, when the study launched, schools had been fully closed for 9 months.
Schools re-opened from early 2021 onwards, partway through the intervention. The main distance
learningprogramsavailabletostudentsspannedTV,radio,andonlineandphone-basededucational
offerings.
The study took place in 30 of Kenya’s 47 counties, in the universe of 112 schools the partner
operated. NewGlobe, the partner NGO of the Kenya study, operates one of the largest, low-cost
private school networks across the country. In Kenya, private school enrollment is relatively high.
For example, in Kenya 33 percent of pre-primary students are enrolled in private schools, and 16
percent ofprimarystudents. Kenya wasthe onlycontextwhere grades1 and2 wereincluded inthe
program, rather than grades 3 through 5. This was done because the baseline level of foundational
numeracy skills was higher than in other contexts, and thus earlier grades were most comparable
in terms of learning levels.
The phone call program was implemented by students’ normal class teacher, who undertook
the phone calls during school closures, as well as after school as part of their teaching duties once
schools re-opened part-way through the study. Randomization was at the teacher level, equivalent
11

to the school-grade level. Teachers were advised to deliver tutoring sessions in English, and also
conducted some parent interactions in Kiswahili.
II.D.3 Nepal
In 2018, only 28 percent of Grade 5 students in Nepal demonstrated grade-level proficiency in
mathematics (NASA 2018; Radhakrishnan et al., 2021). In our baseline survey, only 5 percent of
the Grade 3 to 5 students in the sample could do division.
Nepal’s schools were closed when the trial started in January 2021. While partial re-openings
occurred mid-way through implementation, school disruptions (e.g. frequent closures and reopen-
ings in response to COVID-19 infection waves) were common throughout the study. During this
time, the government rolled out learning programs using radio, television, and online sources, and
disseminated printed learning materials to students. However, few students were able to access
existing remote educational support materials during school closures. Baseline data showed that
in the status quo, only 31 percent of students had teacher interactions during school closure and
less than five percent accessed radio or online education (Radhakrishnan et al., 2021). These gaps
in remote learning access highlight the need to provide additional support, such as ongoing teacher
phone calls to tutor their students.
The study sample included 10 local governments selected by the Ministry of Education, Science
and Technology (MoEST) and World Bank, and covered all 7 provinces, with broad geographic
spread in the country. The sample included public school students in grades 3 through 5.
To assess scalability, the phone call tutorials were implemented through both a government
delivery treatment arm and an NGO delivery arm. Students were randomly assigned to either arm
or a control group. The program was implemented by a coalition of partners including MoEST,
local governments, the World Bank, Teach for Nepal, and Street Child. In the government arm,
public school teachers implemented the program, with teachers teaching students from outside of
theirownregion.8 IntheNGOarm,facilitatorstrainedasteachersdeliveredthephonecalltutoring
program. Calls were conducted in over 12 languages, with students matched to teachers who spoke
their language.
II.D.4 Philippines
The Philippines scored second-lowest of 79 countries in the 2018 PISA mathematics assessment.
During COVID-19, Philippines students also faced one of the world’s longest school closures, with
schools closed for over two years (UNESCO 2023). Only 2 percent of students in our baseline
sample could do division, placing them far behind grade-level expectations; these baseline learning
levels are some of the lowest in our study.
8In an additional randomised trial discussed below, we used the over-subscribed list of eligible public school
teachers in Nepal to randomly assign teachers to an implementation ‘treatment’ arm, or control arm. We then also
measured causal effects of being an instructor on teacher beliefs and practices.
12

At the start of our Philippines study in August 2021, schools had been closed for almost 1.5
years, and they remained closed throughout the trial. During school closures, the government
encouraged households to access educational content provided on radio, television, online, and
printed materials. However our data reveals limited use of distance educational materials, with
fewer than 5 percent accessing radio and TV resources. These gaps, like in other countries, reveal
the need for additional high-quality educational support.
The program was implemented in 3 of the country’s 17 regions. These regions were selected by
the government and represent some of the most marginalized communities in the country. Students
from grades 3 and 4 were enrolled in the study.
In the Philippines, like Nepal, the phone call tutoring program was implemented through a
government delivery treatment arm and an NGO delivery arm. In the government arm, public
school teachers employed by the Philippines Department of Education implemented the program.
Workingwiththegovernment,InnovationsforPovertyAction,aresearchNGO,trainedgovernment
teachers from participating schools on the intervention. The teachers were assigned to call students
at their school in the grade they taught. In the NGO-led teacher-aide arm, Innovations for Poverty
Action in coordination with the central and regional government offices, hired and trained tutors
from the pool of government teacher applicants to implement the program. Calls were conducted
in the 5 most commonly spoken languages in the study regions.
II.D.5 Uganda
Ugandan students are well below grade-level expectations in foundational skills. Recent data shows
that just 6 percent of grade 4 students are able to read a paragraph and only 2 percent can solve
a simple math problem (World Bank 2019). On our baseline survey, only 14 percent of the Grade
3-5 students could do division.
The learning crisis was compounded when, like the Philippines, Uganda entered one of the
world’s longest COVID-induced school closures, with schools closed for nearly two years from
March 2020 to January 2022 (UNESCO 2023). While the government provided distance learning
supporttohouseholds, engagementwiththesematerialswaslimited(CESS2021). Only29percent
of households engaged in radio lessons, 22 percent in printed self-study materials, and under 12
percent in TV and online (Uwezo Uganda, 2021). Like in other contexts, this highlights the need
for higher-engagement approaches, such as live phone calls.
The study took place in 9 out of Uganda’s 135 Districts, which covered some of the most rural
part of the country. The sample included students in grades 3 to 5.
In this study, the implementing organisation was Building Tomorrow, an education-focused
NGO in Uganda. Phone calls were made by Building Tomorrow’s Community Education Vol-
unteers, resident members of communities who are recruited and trained to serve as grassroots
education ‘extension agents’. These volunteers encourage out-of-school children to enroll in school,
and lead literacy and numeracy lessons in community settings. In Uganda, calls were conducted in
one of three languages: English, Luganda, and Runyankore.
13

III Data
In each country, we have two waves of data: baseline and endline.9 The endline surveys took
approximately 30 minutes to administer and included approximately 20 questions. These questions
included a learning assessment, child wellbeing, parental engagement in educational activities,
and parental perceptions of their child’s learning. A portion of the survey was conducted with
the parent, and learning outcomes were collected by directly assessing the child over the phone.
Endline surveys were conducted a few months after the program ended.
The learning assessment was adapted from the ASER test, which has been used frequently in
the literature to measure learning outcomes (Banerjee et al. 2007; Banerjee et al. 2017) and is
used routinely across 14 countries. The test consists of multiple numeracy items, including two-
digit addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division problems. In addition to the ASER test,
we asked students to solve a place value word problem, a fraction problem, and an addition word
problem to capture learning outcomes beyond a core set of mathematical operations.
To maximize the reliability of the phone-based assessment, we introduced a series of quality-
assurance measures. To minimize the likelihood of family members in the household assisting the
child, students had a time cap of two minutes per question and we asked each child to explain
their work. We only marked a problem correct if the child correctly explained how they solved
the problem and enumerators were confident parents were not assisting their child.10 We also
conducted a battery of validity checks to ensure the reliability of the learning outcomes. A first
robustness check compares in-person to phone-based assessment for the exact same set of students.
Anadditionaltestincludedback-checks, witharandomsubsetofstudentstestedtwiceonthesame
competencies. We further randomized various problems of the same proficiency (e.g. four different
questions to measure 2-digit addition with carryover). Finally, we include a real-effort question to
disentangle effects of the intervention on effort on the test versus cognitive skills. Prior research
suggests effort on the test can affect test scores during in-person exams (Gneezy et al. 2019). Thus,
by providing a measure of effort, we can disentangle effort effects versus cognitive skills gains.
The survey also included questions on caregiver engagement in their child’s education and
beliefs. Wemeasuredengagementbyaskingcaregivershowoftentheyspenthelpingtheirchildwith
their schoolwork over the previous weeks. We also included a measure of a caregiver’s confidence
in their child having made progress in learning over the previous months, and their perception of
their child’s numeracy level. Additional questions included information on whether the caregiver
has returned to work. We also asked about parents’ demand for remote learning services in the
future, and whether they would be willing to pay for such a program. For students, we asked about
child’s mental wellbeing, how much they enjoy school, and the child’s own belief about what math
problems they will be able to answer. Finally, we included demographic questions to record the
9In Nepal, we conducted a baseline survey with a random 50 percent of the sample, and in Kenya, we relied on
administrative data instead of baseline survey data.
10Inthecountrieswhereimplementersalsocollectedtheendlinedata,weassignedenumeratorstointerviewstudents
they did not deliver instruction to to help ensure objective assessment.
14

child’s age, grade, and gender.
Theoverallsamplesize,poolingallsites,is16,936households. Forendlinesurveys,werandomly
sampled households from the full sample to interview. This was due to time and cost constraints.
In Appendix Table A1, we show that those randomly selected for endline interview are statistically
equivalent to the full sample at baseline along a series of indicators such as gender, student grade,
and baseline learning level. The samples randomly selected to be interviewed for endline yield a
total endline sub-sample of 12,707.
Appendix Table A2 presents the response rate to the endline surveys and an analysis of survey
attrition for those randomly selected to be part of the endline sample. The follow-up rate was
very high at around 80 percent of respondents at endline. Table A2 also presents a test of whether
response rates differred by treatment assignment. We find no evidence of differential response rates
between treatment and control groups. We also find no evidence of differential attrition in any
individual country. This provides evidence that our sample has a high and unbiased response rate.
Finally, we also include a survey for teachers to assess their beliefs and instructional practices.
These questions include their desire to be a teacher, and teachers’ view that the phone call tutorial
program was helpful for student learning. Questions also include instructional practices, such as
involving parents in education further and better targeting feedback to students’ actual learning
level. These questions can potentially capture persistent effects on educational systems through
teachers changing their beliefs and behaviors beyond the lifecycle of the program.
IV Experimental Design and Empirical Strategy
We ran randomized controlled trials (RCTs) across five countries. Every trial had a control group
and a combined phone call and SMS treatment arm. All studies except the trial in India also
included an SMS-only treatment arm. In two countries, Nepal and the Philippines, we further ran-
domized delivery of the phone call by NGO instructors or government teachers to assess scalability
within government systems. We exploit random assignment to identify causal effects and estimate
the impact of these education in emergencies interventions and various scalable delivery models.
We first estimate intent-to-treat effects as follows:
Y = α+β PhoneCalls +β SMS +γX +δ +η +ϵ (1)
ij 1 j 2 j j s c ij
where Y is a learning outcome for individual i in household j. PhoneCalls and SMS take
ij j j
on the value 1 in their respective treatment arms and 0 otherwise. X denotes a vector of baseline
j
control variables to enhance statistical power and precision.11 δ refers to relevant strata in each
s
study, which includes baseline learning, gender, school, and region fixed effects.12 We both assess
impact on specific learning proficiencies as well as on standardized outcomes relative to control
11These variables include: student grade and baseline learning levels
12The strata used in each trial were as follows. India: baseline level, gender, school; Kenya: school; Nepal:
region, baseline level; Philippines: baseline level; Uganda: baseline level, school type; previous education program
participation.
15

groupvariationineachcountry. Ourmainspecificationspoolacrossstudiesandweincludecountry
fixed effects η . We estimate the regression using ordinary least squares (OLS). We run secondary
c
regressions using alternative weights by country as well as country-by-country estimations.
WealsoranasubsetoftrialswherephonecallsweredeliveredbyNGOsorgovernmentteachers.
We estimate government versus NGO delivery effects using the following specification:
Y = α+β PhoneCalls NGO+β PhoneCalls Gov+γX +δ +η +ϵ (2)
ij 1 j 1 j j s c ij
In the main analysis of the pooled sample, no adjustments are made to reflect the differences
in sample sizes between countries, so every observation is weighted equally. This follows standard
practiceintheanalysisofmulti-siteRCTs. Wetestrobustnessusingregressionsthatinsteadweight
each country equally, and find similar results.
All standard errors are clustered at the level of the unit of randomization. In most countries
this was the household level, which was de facto the same as the student level since one student
participated per household; in a subset of treatment comparisons it was the school-grade level.13
The above specifications are the core estimation strategies. Additional specifications include other
outcomes of interest beyond learning, such as engagement, as well as regressions run country by
country, heterogeneity analysis, and various types of pooling across countries.
Due to randomization, we expect treatment and control groups to be balanced at baseline in
expectation. Appendix Table A3 presents balance tests using baseline data for key demographics
and the same learning level variable. We find no statistically significant differences across multi-
ple dimensions, including gender, grade, caregiver type, caregiver education levels, and baseline
learning. This is robust to multiple specifications, including with and without country fixed effects.
Similar results are found for each country, with balanced samples in each individual country. This
reveals that each randomization yielded balanced arms in line with expectations.
In all sites, the experimental design had high compliance rates: no control households received
the program, and nearly all randomized treatment households participated in the expected treat-
ment group. Detailed weekly monitoring data shows high take-up and fidelity, as shown in Figure
A1.
In a secondary analysis, we embed another randomized trial which randomly allocated a subset
of government teachers to deliver the phone call tutorials out of a pool of hundreds of eligible
teachersinNepal. Thus,wecancomparecontrolandtreatmentteachersinthegovernmentdelivery
arm, and whether participating in phone call tutorials changed teachers’ subsequent beliefs and
behaviors, which we estimate at the school level as follows:
13InIndia,Nepal,andUgandaallarmswererandomizedatthehouseholdlevel. InKenyaandthePhilippinessome
arms were randomized at the household level (e.g. the NGO arms of the Philippines) and some at the school-grade
level (e.g., the Government arm of the Philippines) with corresponding control groups randomized at the same level
for each arm. In Kenya, the phone call arm was randomized at the school-grade level while the SMS arms were
cross randomized at the household level. Of note, robustness checks find little to no difference if standard errors
are clustered or not across all specifications. This is largely due to do the fact that there is substantial variation in
learning outcomes within a cluster, such that the intracluster correlation is very low at about .03 in the Philippines
and Kenya.
16

S = α+β TeacherCalls +γX +δ +ϵ (3)
j 1 j j s j
where S captures teacher beliefs or instructional practices. These outcomes measure potential
j
spillovers into the education system through teacher beliefs and behaviors which could persist
beyond the program.
V Results
V.A Main Results: Learning Across Contexts and Scale Delivery Models
Our results show consistently large and robust effect sizes of phone call tutorials on learning
across contexts, with average effects across all five countries between 0.30-0.35 standard devia-
tions. Column 1 in Table 1 shows that for our main learning outcome of foundational numeracy
skills—measured using average student level — we find large, statistically significant learning dif-
ferences between treatment and control groups. For the combined phone and SMS group, there
was a 0.327 standard deviation (P < 0.001) increase in the average numerical operation across
all 5 countries. For the SMS messages group, we find smaller but still statistically significant im-
provements in learning, of 0.083 standard deviations (P=0.003). For both the SMS group and
the combined Phone and SMS group, the magnitude of the impact and statistical significance are
robust to different estimation approaches, for example including baseline controls and country and
grade fixed effects (Column 2), and weighting results by country-arm (Columns 3 and 4).
These results are large relative to the typical education intervention’s effectiveness. A recent
reviewbyEvansandYuan(2022)foundthatthemedianeffectiveinterventionyielded0.10standard
deviation gains in learning. Moreover, a review of 150 interventions by Angrist et al. (2020) found
thatoverhalfofeducationinterventionsdonotworkatall. Thesereviewsputourresultsincontext,
with phone call tutorials three times as effective as the median education intervention. Moreover,
effects are even larger in these multi-country studies than in the Botswana proof-of-concept study,
wherelearningimprovedby0.12standarddeviations(Angrist,Bergman,andMatsheng2022). This
result contrasts with prior literature showing that proof-of-concept studies rarely scale successfully
tonewcontexts(List2022)orexperiencediminishingreturns(Caridad, Rubio-Codina, andSchady
2021). Ratherthanfindingdiminishingreturns, wefindresultsimproveastheapproachisadapted,
scaled, and tested across contexts. A potential explanation is higher need for the intervention, with
longerandmoredisruptiveschoolclosuresinthemulti-countrytrialswithuptotwoyearsofschool
closure.
In Table 2, we show results for the subset of countries (Nepal and the Philippines) where we
randomizeddeliverymodelstotestscalabilitywithingovernmentsystems. Wecomparegovernment
teachers with NGO delivery. Column 1 shows the pooled results: both government teachers and
NGO instructors are effective at improving student learning, with government teachers improving
learning by 0.314 standard deviations across both contexts, and NGO teacher aides improving
17

learning by 0.263 standard deviations (P < 0.001 for both). The similarity in effect, with no
statisticallysignificantdifferencebetweenmodels,demonstratesthattheseeducationinemergencies
programs can be effectively implemented by government teachers.
These results show striking effectiveness when delivered by governments, on par with NGOs.
Prior literature has found that programs often work when delivered by NGOs but fail to replicate
when scaled by governments. For example, in Kenya, contract teachers improved learning, but
when delivered by the government, program effectiveness waned (Bold et al. 2018). A large-
scale government teacher training program in Nepal similarly found no effect, largely due to poor
implementation (Schaffner, Glewwe, and Sharma 2021). Our results build on this prior literature,
providing an alternative view: government delivery can achieve large learning gains. Figure 2
visualizes results from Tables 1 and 2, with average effects across studies and split by government
versus NGO delivery models.
We embedded an additional randomized study allocating a random subset of teachers to deliver
the phone call tutorials in Nepal out of a list of hundreds of eligible government teachers.14 This
experimentalvariationenablesdetectionoftheimpactofdeliveringtheprogramonteachers’beliefs
andpractices–ameasureofpotentialspillovereffectsintotheeducationsystemthatpersistthrough
teachers beyond the intervention. In addition, teacher randomization enables generalization to the
broader set of eligible government teachers. Thus, results capture government delivery impacts
which do not hinge on implementers being highly selected, and effects are likely to translate to
typical government teachers in the education system.
Table 3 shows teacher practices shift substantially; teachers are 9.3 percentage points more
likely to target their feedback to students learning level (P < 0.05). Teachers are also more likely
to get parents involved in education (P < 0.1). We further find large effects on teacher perceptions
that they were able to help students learn, as well as their desire to teach, with a 15.8 percentage-
point gain in wanting to be a teacher if they could make the choice again (P < 0.1 and P < 0.01
respectively). Theseresultssuggestthatdeliveringeffectiveprogramscouldunlockavirtuouscycle
within government education systems, in turn motivating teachers to want to teach and to improve
their teaching practice.
14Over 80 percent of eligible teachers wanted to engage in the phone call tutorials. Of those enrolled in the study,
97 percent of both control and treatment teachers stated that they wanted to deliver the program in the future.
18

Figure 2: Learning Outcomes (SD) at Scale across 5 Countries and Scaled by Government
0.400
0.327
0.314
0.300
0.263
0.200
0.100 0.083
0.074
0.000
S M S m ess a g
es
P h o n e c all a n d S M
S
S M S m ess a g
es
P h o n e c all a n d S M S - N G
O
P h o n e c all a n d S M S - G
ov
Pooled Learning in 5 Countries Government vs NGO Scale-up in Nepal & Philippines
Notes: Thisfigureshowstreatmenteffectsonlearningoutcomes. Dataarepresentedastreatmenteffectsrelativetothe
controlgroup±95percentconfidenceintervals. FullstatisticalresultsforthetreatmenteffectsarepresentedinTable1
and2. Effectsareexpressedintermsofstandarddeviationsforcomparableunits. Learningreferstohowachildscores
onfourbasicnumeracyoptions: nooperationscorrect,addition,subtraction,multiplication,anddivision(forwhichwe
report the average level on a scale of 0–4). The colors distinguish between the pooled learning in 5 countries and the
GovernmentvsNGOscale-upinNepalandPhilippines.
Table4showsresultsbycountry. Wefindthatphonecalltutorialsareeffectiveineverycountry,
showing scalability and effectiveness across diverse contexts. Results are largest in countries which
experienced the longest school closures: Uganda and the Philippines. In both countries, where
students were out of school for almost two years and the counterfactual for the control group was
very limited schooling, effects are extremely large with the phone call tutorials arm producing
improvements of 0.891 standard deviations in Uganda and 0.454 in the Philippines on average (P<
0.001 for both). These are also the only countries where there were statistically significant learning
gainsintheSMS-onlyarm, with0.207gainsinUgandaand0.090inthePhilippines. SMSmessages
havenostatisticallysignificanteffectinNepalandKenya. TheseresultssuggestthatSMSmessages
can work in contexts with the largest need. Live phone call instruction might be necessary to strike
the balance of being intensive enough to deliver impact that can be sustained and scaled across
diverse contexts while remaining cheap and scalable.
While results show that phone calls were consistently effective across countries, the magnitude
of effects differs by country. In addition to the potential explanation that the largest impacts
occurred where there was the most need (Philippines and Uganda), another likely contributing
19

factor is improved implementation over time. Indeed, effect sizes increase in tandem with the
order of the trial: Kenya, then Nepal, then India, then Philippines, and finally Uganda. Angrist
et al. (2023) present descriptive evidence of increasing implementation fidelity of the program
trial-by-trial using detailed monitoring data. For example, the accuracy of targeted educational
instruction increases from a starting point of 50.9 percent of students in Nepal to 81.5 percent
on average in Uganda. These data provide support for the notion of a “learning curve”, with
implementation fidelity improving over time, rather than decreasing. Equipped with monitoring
data and coordinating mechanisms to learn across trials, these results show that programs have the
potential to become higher impact over time as they are scaled and implemented in new contexts.
Table 5 shows learning outcomes across specific proficiencies. Results show that the combined
phone and SMS arm increases the share of students who get division problems correct by 13.9
percentage points – a 99 percent increase in division (from a control mean of 14.1 percent). These
resultsbyproficiencydemonstratethatlearningoutcomesimprovedsubstantiallyinabsoluteterms,
in addition to standardized deviation gains, and across a range of proficiencies. We also find
increases in the share of students able to correctly answer place-value problems, and higher-order
competencies, such as fractions and word problems. Since fractions were not directly taught during
the intervention, this reveals learning extended beyond familiarity with the content taught. These
resultsfurtherrevealdynamiccomplementaritiesinskillformation, showingthebenefitsoflearning
basic numeracy accrues to learning additional higher-order skills (Cunha and Heckman 2007).
We further explore learning loss and learning recovery along specific proficiencies in Appendix
Figure A4. In Uganda, where effects are largest, less than 17 percent of grade 4 students can
divide at baseline in the control group. At endline, only 10 percent can divide, showing substantial
learning loss. In the treatment group, 48 percent of grade 4 students at endline can divide, fully
recovering learning loss due to school closures. Moreover, only 21 percent of grade 5 students in the
controlgroupatbaselinecandivide, revealingthatgrade 4studentsinthetreatmentgroupsurpass
grade 5 students in the status quo. Thus, not only does the intervention facilitate full learning loss
recovery, it exceeds typical learning trajectories by nearly an order of magnitude.
TableA4showsheterogeneoustreatmenteffects. Column1suggeststheprogramworkedpartic-
ularlywellforstudentswherethecaregiverhadlowerlevelsofformaleducation(primaryeducation
or less). This suggests that results are strongest when there are fewer alternative education sup-
port systems at home. This also reveals that even in low literacy contexts, parents can be effective
conduits for quality instruction. There is no evidence of differential treatment effects by student
gender and the programs are similarly effective for students across the distribution on baseline
learning levels. This minimal heterogeneity is likely due to the fact that the program was highly
targeted and one-on-one, ensuring few students were left behind.
In Table A5, we show results on caregivers’ time usage, including on overall educational invest-
ments and time spent at work. It is possible that by inducing caregivers to support one child’s
education, they invest less in other children in the households’ education. We find evidence of the
program crowding in, rather than crowding out, overall time spent on education. The program
20

caused a net increase in the share and frequency of caregivers undertaking educational activities
with their child. Moreover, some studies suggest that mothers’ engagement in their child’s educa-
tion could crowd out their labor market participation (Evans, Jakiela, Knauer 2021). However, we
find limited evidence of such a trade-off, potentially since the program is highly efficient, requiring
only a short amount of time to produce large learning gains. These results suggests that highly
efficient education programs can deliver large learning gains, with minimal risk of crowd-out of
other productive educational and work activities.
V.B Measuring learning by phone
Inadditiontothemainresultsoftheeducationinemergencyprograms, wealsocontributenewevi-
denceontherobustnessofremotelearningassessmentdataacrossfivecountries. Phoneassessment
hasemergedasacommonstrategyforlarge-scalehouseholdsurveyssuchastheWorldBankLiving
Standards Measurement Survey (LSMS). A growing literature has started to explore the validity of
phone-based assessments to measure learning outcomes (World Bank 2022; Angrist, Bergman, and
Matsheng 2022; Gupta et al. 2022; Rodriguez-Segura and Schueler 2022), with emerging evidence
suggesting phone assessment can capture meaningful information at high frequency and low cost.
Table 6 shows the results of five checks we conducted on the validity of our main learning
outcomes of learning assessments via phone. Column 1 shows the first robustness check where
we compare in-person to phone-based assessment for the exact same students in Kenya. We find
no statistically significant difference between these two modes of assessment. An additional test
included back-checks, with a random subset of students tested twice on the same competencies.
We find a strong relationship as expected, with large positive coefficients of 0.473 to 0.653 and
t-statistics ranging from 5 to over 20. We further randomize students to receive different problems
of the same proficiency (e.g., four different questions to measure 2-digit addition with carryover).
Resultsshownodifferencebyquestion,showingaccurateestimatesoflatentability. Finally,Column
5 shows results from a real-effort question to disentangle effects of the intervention on effort on the
test versus cognitive skills. Students were asked to answer several effort tasks, for example figuring
out the day of the week or counting zeros and ones.15 We find no statistically significant effects of
the interventions on effort, revealing that learning gains are largely a function of cognitive skills.
V.C Results from Another Education Emergency
COVID-19 disrupted education for over a billion children, causing one of the world’s largest scale
education emergencies. However, As Figure 1 shows, many other education emergencies occur be-
yondCOVID-19. Yetlittleexperimentalevidenceexistsinthesesettingsonhowtomosteffectively
promote learning.
15There is no standard measurement of student effort in the academic literature. However, real-effort tasks range
fromsolvingmazestoaddingaseriesof2-digitnumbers. Otherproxiesofeffortincludemeasuringtherateofdecline
in performance as the test progresses or the effort exerted while filling out an additional survey. Since we aimed
to differentiate numerical ability from effort, we chose a problem that required little arithmetic skill, and required
non-arithmetic effort.
21

In addition to the core set of randomized trials assessing impact of phone-based tutorials during
COVID-19 school disruptions, an additional education emergency took place during the course of
the study – a devastating typhoon in the Philippines which destroyed 4,000 classrooms and dis-
rupted learning for 2 million children. We collected detailed student-level data on who was affected
by the typhoon (called “Typhoon Rai”). The interaction between those exogenously affected by
the typhoon and randomization to phone call tutorials and SMS messages resulted in a quasi-
experiment.16 The results provide evidence on the disruptive effects of the typhoon on learning
and approaches to stem learning losses in this additional emergency context.
We start by estimating learning losses due to Typhoon Rai. Results in Table 7 show that the
typhoon reduced learning by approximately 0.12-0.20 standard deviations (Column 1 and 2). In
addition, since randomization of treatments is orthogonal to which students were affected by the
typhoon, wecanestimatetheimpactofthephone-basedtutorialsduringthisadditionalemergency.
Results in column (4) which includes controls show that despite the detrimental effects of the
typhoon, phone call tutorials continued to be effective, with 0.26 standard deviation learning gains
relative to the control group (P < 0.01). SMS messages alone were not enough to stem learning
losses. These results reveal that the more effective education in emergencies program, phone call
tutorials, persist across multiple emergency settings.
V.D Secondary Outcomes: Parent and Child Beliefs and Non-Cognitive Skills
Inadditiontolearningoutcomes, weexamineimpactsonbeliefsaboutlearninganddemandforthe
intervention. We provide new evidence on children’s perceptions of their own learning in Table 8
Column 1, an outcome rarely explored to date. We find children update their beliefs substantially,
by 0.21 standard deviations in the phone call and SMS treatment and by 0.04 in the SMS-only
treatment - both remarkably similar to gains observed in Table 1. Column 2 examines caregivers’
beliefsandshowsthattheyobservedtheirchild’slearning, updatingtheirbeliefsabouttheirchild’s
level of learning by 0.114 standard deviations in the phone call and SMS treatment and by 0.075
in the SMS only treatment – corresponding broadly, although imperfectly and less accurately than
their children, to gains observed in Table 1. Moreover, caregivers state that they think their
child’s learning has progressed (column 3), with large and statistically significant effects for phone
call tutorials, in line with where treatment effects are largest. These results build on a growing
literature exploring the importance of parents knowing their child’s learning level, enabling them
to better support their education (Bergman 2021).
In addition, caregivers have high demand for the program. The control means are striking,
with 97 percent of parents stating they would like the phone call tutorials, an unusually high level
of interest. The phone call tutorials induce even greater interest, with 4 percentage point gains
bridging the gap to 100 percent interest. Willingness to Pay (WTP) for the program also increases
16There is no statistically significant difference between those affected by the typhoon and those unaffected, com-
paring on baseline and time-invariant characteristics such as treatment assignment, student age, sex, grade, and
caregiver level of education.
22

by 4 to 6 percentage points, revealing the potential to stimulate further demand.17
Finally, Table 9 examines impacts on non-cognitive skills. A growing literature highlights
the importance of both cognitive as well as non-cognitive skills for future life outcomes, such as
graduation from tertiary education and labor market outcomes (Jackson 2018). We assess impacts
on a series of non-cognitive skills, such as perseverance and ambition, in line with Carlana and La
Ferrara (2021). We asked students who had just completed a riddle if they wanted to complete
another difficult riddle question (perseverance), and if so, whether they wanted an easier or harder
one (ambition). We find sizable effects on these outcomes, with 6.2 percentage point gains in
ambition, a 29 percent increase relative to the control mean. We further find positive effects on
measures of child well-being, such as enjoying school and worrying less, statistically significant at
the 95 percent level and above. There was no effect on these non-cognitive skill outcomes for the
SMS-only treatment.
These results reveal that while there is often a debate between whether education should focus
on cognitive or non-cognitive skill acquisition, they are not mutually exclusive. Indeed, some
educational interventions, such as the phone call tutorials tested in this study, can promote both.
It also shows that phone-based tutoring models can impart the types of non-cognitive skills that
are often viewed as a benefit of brick-and-mortar schools. This suggests that when emergencies do
disrupt education, children can still make progress on both cognitive and non-cognitive skills from
targeted phone tutoring programs.
V.E Cost-effectiveness
An important feature of the education in emergencies approaches tested in this study is that they
are low cost. The primary tool required to implement the program is a mobile phone, owned
by nearly every household in most countries (World Bank 2021). Since the approach builds on
existing household infrastructure, the main costs are related to content delivery and connecting
with families, which are often marginal, such as airtime for phone calls. In addition to being low
cost, the approach has low procurement needs, a particularly attractive feature for governments.
We carefully collected cost data in each trial. Our estimates suggest an average cost per child of
thephonecallandSMStutorialsofabout$12perchildonaverage.18 Webenchmarktheprogram’s
impacts against other education programs using a variety of approaches. First, we compare raw
estimates of effectiveness and cost with similar programs, like tutoring and targeted instruction.
Phone call tutorials simulate the benefits of one-on-one tutoring, shown to be one of the most
effective educational approaches (Nickow et al. 2020). However, many tutoring programs are high
cost. For example, a prominent tutoring program yielded 0.19 to 0.31 SD learning gains at a cost
17WTP was measured by asking if a math tutoring program were hypothetically offered to the household in the
future, how much would they be willing to pay for it. This outcome is constructed as an indicator variable coded 1
if they would be willing to pay.
18Thisestimateisevencheaperthanestimatesintheproof-of-conceptstudyinBotswanaduetoeconomiesofscale
as the approach has scaled up, including cost savings such as use of existing pedagogical material, shorter and more
efficient training, and streamlined data monitoring systems.
23

of $2,500 per child. In low- and middle-income settings, phone calls could provide similar or larger
impacts two orders of magnitude more cheaply, enabling scale-up across diverse settings.
Second, we use a new cost-effectiveness measure in education that has been estimated for over
150 impact evaluations in low- and middle-income countries called Learning Adjusted Years of
Schooling (LAYS), interpreted as a high-quality year of schooling gained (Angrist et al. 2020).
We find the program yields 3.4 LAYS per $100, ranking among the top 10 out of 150 education
interventions reviewed. This result highlights the potential for phone call tutorials to deliver value
to education systems and students in a broad array of contexts, both during and potentially even
outside education emergencies. Even before the COVID-19 pandemic, there was high demand for
education programs to help address the global learning crisis. Our results suggest phone-based
targeted tutoring programs, such as the one tested in this study, have the potential to deliver
cost-effective learning gains across contexts and with governments.
VI Conclusion
In this paper, we present results from large-scale randomized trials evaluating the provision of edu-
cation in emergency programs across five countries: India, Kenya, Nepal, Philippines, and Uganda.
We test multiple scalable models, including government delivery, of remote instruction for pri-
mary school children during COVID-19, which disrupted education for over 1 billion schoolchildren
worldwide,aswellasduringanadditionalemergency,atyphoon,whichfurtherdisruptedschooling.
Despite heterogeneous contexts, results show that the effectiveness of phone call tutorials can
scale across contexts; we find consistently large and robust effect sizes on learning, with average
effects of 0.30-0.35 standard deviations. In the subset of trials where we randomized whether the
intervention was provided by NGO instructors or government teachers, we find similar effects,
indicating scalability within government systems.
These results have relevance to global efforts to support education in emergencies. Emergencies
– including conflict, diseases, natural disasters, and climate shocks – routinely shut down schools,
affectingmillionsofstudentswhoforgetandforgolearning. Duringtheseshocks,alternativemodels
are needed to deliver education. The results presented in this paper show that rigorous testing of
programs in humanitarian settings is possible and identify approaches that can scale effectively
across contexts and cost-effectively improve learning for students.
Even outside global education emergencies, millions of children worldwide learn very little in
school, either because they are taught curricula beyond their learning level, or they are unable
to access quality instruction since they live in remote areas. Given widespread mobile phones
ownershipratesglobally,phone-basedtutoringprogramsliketheonestudiedherehavethepotential
to maintain schooling continuity and accelerate learning even outside emergency settings. The low-
cost, high-access, and ease of implementation of phone tutoring could build more resilience into
education systems, enabling systems to better withstand frequent shocks, and to more generally
utilize cost-effective approaches to address a persistent global learning crisis.
24

VII References
Aker, JennyC., andIsaacM.Mbiti. “MobilephonesandeconomicdevelopmentinAfrica.”Journal
of economic Perspectives 24, no. 3 (2010): 207-32.
Aker, Jenny C., Christopher Ksoll, and Travis J. Lybbert. “Can mobile phones improve learn-
ing? Evidence from a field experiment in Niger.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 4, no. 4 (2012): 94-120.
Andrabi, Tahir, Benjamin Daniels, and Jishnu Das. “Human capital accumulation and disasters:
Evidence from the Pakistan earthquake of 2005.” Journal of Human Resources (2021):
0520-10887R1.
Angrist, Noam, Peter Bergman, and Moitshepi Matsheng. “Experimental evidence on learning
using low-tech when school is out.” Nature human behaviour (2022): 1-10.
Angrist,Noam,SimeonDjankov,PinelopiK.Goldberg, andHarryA.Patrinos. “Measuringhuman
capital using global learning data.” Nature 592, no. 7854 (2021): 403-408.
Angrist, Noam, Michael Ainomugisha, Saipramod Bathena, Peter Bergman, Colin Crossley, Claire
Cullen, Thato Letsomo, MoitshepiMatsheng, Rene Marlon Panti, ShwetlenaSabarwal, and
Tim Sullivan. 2023. “Learning Curve: Progress in the Replication Crisis.” AEA Papers
and Proceedings.
Angrist,Noam,DavidK.Evans,DeonFilmer,RachelGlennerster,F.HalseyRogers,andShwetlena
Sabarwal. “How to improve education outcomes most efficiently? A comparison of 150
interventions using the new Learning-Adjusted Years of Schooling metric.” (2020).
Araujo, M.Caridad, MartaRubio-Codina, andNorbertSchady. “70to700to70,000: Lessonsfrom
the Jamaica Experiment.” In The Scale-Up Effect in Early Childhood and Public Policy,
pp. 211-232. Routledge, 2021.
Azevedo, Joa˜o Pedro, Amer Hasan, Diana Goldemberg, Koen Geven, and Syedah Aroob Iqbal.
“Simulating the potential impacts of COVID-19 school closures on schooling and learning
outcomes: A set of global estimates.” The World Bank Research Observer 36, no. 1 (2021):
1-40.
Bacher-Hicks, Andrew, Joshua Goodman, and Christine Mulhern. “Inequality in household adap-
tationtoschoolingshocks: Covid-inducedonlinelearningengagementinrealtime.”Journal
of Public Economics 193 (2021): 104345.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., Shawn Cole, Esther Duflo, and Leigh Linden. “Remedying education: Ev-
idence from two randomized experiments in India.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
122, no. 3 (2007): 1235-1264.
Banerjee, Abhijit, EstherDuflo, NathanaelGoldberg, DeanKarlan, RobertOsei, WilliamParient´e,
JeremyShapiro, BramThuysbaert, andChristopherUdry. “Amultifacetedprogramcauses
lasting progress for the very poor: Evidence from six countries.” Science 348, no. 6236
(2015): 1260799.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Rukmini Banerji, James Berry, Esther Duflo, Harini Kannan, Shobhini Mukerji,
25

MarcShotland,andMichaelWalton. “Fromproofofconcepttoscalablepolicies: Challenges
and solutions, with an application.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 31, no. 4 (2017): 73-
102.
Bergman, Peter. “Parent-child information frictions and human capital investment: Evidence from
a field experiment.” Journal of Political Economy 129, no. 1 (2021): 286-322.
Bold, Tessa, Mwangi Kimenyi, Germano Mwabu, and Justin Sandefur. “Experimental evidence on
scaling up education reforms in Kenya.” Journal of Public Economics 168 (2018): 1-20.
Burde, Dana, and Leigh L. Linden. “Bringing education to Afghan girls: A randomized controlled
trial of village-based schools.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5, no. 3
(2013): 27-40.
Burde, Dana, Ozen Guven, Jo Kelcey, Heddy Lahmann, and Khaled Al-Abbadi. “What works to
promote children’s educational access, quality of learning, and wellbeing in crisis-affected
contexts.” Education Rigorous Literature Review, Department for International Develop-
ment. London: Department for International Development (2015).
Carlana, Michela, and Eliana La Ferrara. “Apart but connected: Online tutoring and student
outcomes during the COVID-19 pandemic.” (2021).
Carlana, Michela, Eliana La Ferrara, and Carolina Lopez. “Exacerbated Inequalities: the Learning
Loss from COVID-19 in Italy.” AEA Papers and Proceedings (2023).
Carvalho, S. Crawfurd, L. School’s Out: Now What? (Center for Global Development, 2020);
https://www.cgdev.org/blog/schools-out-now-what
CEES. Dissemination on Mitigation and Management of COVID19 Impact on Uganda’s Edu-
cation System (2021). https://cees.mak.ac.ug/dissemination-mitigation-and-management-
covid19-impact-ugandas-education-system/
Cooper, Harris, Barbara Nye, Kelly Charlton, James Lindsay, and Scott Greathouse. “The effects
of summer vacation on achievement test scores: A narrative and meta-analytic review.”
Review of educational research 66, no. 3 (1996): 227-268.
Crawfurd, Lee, David K. Evans, Susannah Hares, and Justin Sandefur. Teaching and testing by
phone in a pandemic. No. 591. Center for Global Development, 2021.
Christensen,Darin,OeindrilaDube,JohannesHaushofer,BilalSiddiqi,andMaartenVoors. “Build-
ing resilient health systems: Experimental evidence from sierra leone and the 2014 ebola
outbreak.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 136, no. 2 (2021): 1145-1198.
Cunha, Flavio, and James Heckman. “The technology of skill formation.” American economic
review 97, no. 2 (2007): 31-47.
Duflo, Annie, Jessica Kiessel, and Adrienne Lucas. External Validity: Four Models of Improving
Student Achievement. No. w27298. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research,
2020.
Eble, Alex, Chris Frost, Alpha Camara, Baboucarr Bouy, Momodou Bah, Maitri Sivaraman, Pei-
Tseng Jenny Hsieh et al. “How much can we remedy very low learning levels in rural parts
of low-income countries? Impact and generalizability of a multi-pronged para-teacher inter-
26

ventionfromacluster-randomizedtrialintheGambia.”JournalofDevelopmentEconomics
148 (2021): 102539.
Evans, David K., Pamela Jakiela, and Heather A. Knauer. “The impact of early childhood inter-
ventions on mothers.” Science 372, no. 6544 (2021): 794-796.
Evans, David K., and Fei Yuan. “How big are effect sizes in international education studies?.”
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 44, no. 3 (2022): 532-540.
Glewwe, Paul,andKarthikMuralidharan. “Improvingeducationoutcomesindevelopingcountries:
Evidence, knowledge gaps, and policy implications.” In Handbook of the Economics of
Education, vol. 5, pp. 653-743. Elsevier, 2016.
Gneezy, Uri, John A. List, Jeffrey A. Livingston, Xiangdong Qin, Sally Sadoff, and Yang Xu.
“Measuring success in education: The role of effort on the test itself.” American Economic
Review: Insights 1, no. 3 (2019): 291-308.
Gupta, Saloni, Kumar Satyam, Niharika Gupta and Rahul Ahluwalia (2022). “Can Phone Assess-
ments Generate Reliable Student Learning Data?” Central Square Foundation.
Hassan, Hashibul, Asad Islam, Abu Siddique, and Liang Choon Wang. Telementoring and home-
schooling during school closures: A randomized experiment in rural Bangladesh. No. 13.
TUM School of Governance at the Technical University of Munich, 2021.
Hevia, Felipe J., Miguel Sz´ekely, Tamara Vinacur, and Pablo Zoido. “Tutor´ıas remotas: revisio´n
de la literatura.” (2022). Inter-American Development Bank.
Jackson, C. Kirabo. “What do test scores miss? The importance of teacher effects on non–test
score outcomes.” Journal of Political Economy 126, no. 5 (2018): 2072-2107.
Jack, Rebecca, Clare Halloran, James Okun, and Emily Oster. “Pandemic Schooling Mode and
Student Test Scores: Evidence from US School Districts.” American Economic Review:
Insights (2021)
Jaume, David, and Alexander Will´en. “The long-run effects of teacher strikes: evidence from
Argentina.” Journal of Labor Economics 37, no. 4 (2019): 1097-1139.
List, John A. The voltage effect: How to make good ideas great and great ideas scale. 2022.
Lichand, Guilherme, Carlos Alberto Doria, Onicio Leal-Neto, and Jo˜ao Paulo Cossi Fernandes.
“The impacts of remote learning in secondary education during the pandemic in Brazil.”
Nature Human Behaviour 6, no. 8 (2022): 1079-1086.
Lucas, Adrienne M., Patrick J. McEwan, Moses Ngware, and Moses Oketch. “Improving early-
grade literacy in East Africa: Experimental evidence from Kenya and Uganda.” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management 33, no. 4 (2014): 950-976.
Mobarak, Ahmed Mushfiq. 2022. “Assessing social aid: the scale-up process needs evidence, too.”
Nature: 892-894.
Moscoviz, Laura, and David K. Evans. “Learning loss and student dropouts during the covid-19
pandemic: A review of the evidence two years after schools shut down.” Center for Global
Development, Working Paper 609 (2022).
Muralidharan, Karthik, Abhijeet Singh, and Alejandro J. Ganimian. ”Disrupting education? Ex-
27

perimental evidence on technology-aided instruction in India.” American Economic Review
109, no. 4 (2019): 1426-60.
Nickow, Andre, Philip Oreopoulos, and Vincent Quan. 2020. “The impressive effects of tutoring
on prek-12 learning: A systematic review and meta-analysis of the experimental evidence.”
Patrinos, Harry Anthony, Emiliana Vegas, and Rohan Carter-Rau. “An Analysis of COVID-19
Student Learning Loss.” (2022).
Pritchett, Lant. The rebirth of education: Schooling ain’t learning. CGD Books, 2013.
Pritchett, Lant, and Justin Sandefur. “Learning from experiments when context matters.” Ameri-
can Economic Review 105, no. 5 (2015): 471-475.
Radhakrishnan, Karthika; Angrist, Noam; Bergman, Peter; Cullen, Claire; Matsheng, Moitshepi;
Ramakrishnan, Anusha; Sabarwal, Shwetlena; Sharma, Uttam. Learning in the Time of
COVID-19 : Insights from Nepal (2021). World Bank, Washington, DC.
Robinson, CarlyD., andSusannaLoeb. “High-impacttutoring: Stateoftheresearchandpriorities
for future learning.” National Student Support Accelerator 21, no. 284 (2021): 1-53.
Rodriguez-Segura, Daniel, and Beth E. Schueler. “Can learning be measured by phone? Evidence
from Kenya.” Economics of Education Review 90 (2022): 102309.
Schaffner, Julie, Paul Glewwe, and Uttam Sharma. Why Programs Fail: Lessons for Improv-
ing Public Service Quality from a Mixed-Methods Evaluation of an Unsuccessful Teacher
Training Program in Nepal. No. 1701-2021-3437. 2021.
Schueler, Beth E., and Daniel Rodriguez-Segura. “A Cautionary Tale of Tutoring Hard-to-Reach
Students in Kenya. EdWorkingPaper No. 21-432.” Annenberg Institute for School Reform
at Brown University (2021).
UNESCO.SustainableDevelopmentGoal(SDG)4CountryProfile(2016). http://uis.unesco.org/sites/default/files/documents/countryprofiles/KE.pdf
UNESCO.COVID-19EducationResponse(2023). https://covid19.uis.unesco.org/global-monitoring-
school-closures-covid19/country-dashboard/
Uwezo. Are Our Children Learning? Uwezo Kenya Sixth Learning Assessment Report (2016).
Nairobi: Twaweza East Africa
Uwezo Uganda. Are our Children Learning? Illuminating the Covid-19 Learning Losses and Gains
in Uganda. Uwezo National Learning Assessment Report, 2021 (2021). Kampala: Uwezo
Uganda
World Bank. 2018. World Development Report 2018: Learning to realize education’s promise.
WorldBank. 2019. UgandaEconomicUpdate, 13thEdition, May2019; UgandaEconomicUpdate,
13th Edition, May 2019 : Economic Development and Human Capital in Uganda - A Case
for Investing More in Education. World Bank, Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2021. Mobile cellular subscriptions (per 100 people).
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.CEL.SETS.P2
World Bank. Supporting Student Learning at Home with Phone-based Formative Assessments:
Landscape Review. World Bank, 2022.
28

VIII Tables
Table 1: Learning Outcomes at Scale Across 5 Countries
pooled full sample weighted by country-arm
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Learning (SD) Learning (SD) Learning (SD) Learning (SD)
SMS messages 0.083*** 0.083*** 0.138*** 0.139***
(0.027) (0.027) (0.028) (0.028)
[0.003] [0.002] [0.000] [0.000]
Phone call and SMS 0.327*** 0.321*** 0.414*** 0.408***
(0.025) (0.025) (0.026) (0.026)
[0.000] [0.000] [0.000] [0.000]
Observations 8902 8902 8902 8902
Control Mean 1.318 1.318 1.318 1.318
P-Val: SMS vs Phone Call + SMS 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
Country Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
Grade Fixed Effects No Yes No Yes
Countries Included All 5 All 5 All 5 All 5
Notes: Thistablereportstreatmenteffectsonlearningoutcomesforapooledsampleaswellassamplesweightedbycountry-
arm. Learning refers to how a child scores on four basic numeracy options: no operations correct, addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division (measured on a scale of 0–4 and converted to standard deviations). “Pooled full sample” weighs
theobservationsacrossallthecountriesequally. “Weightedbycountry-arm”accountsforthedifferencesinsamplesizesamong
countries. Column (1) measures the learning differences between the treatment and control group and column (2) includes
baselinecontrolsandcountryandgradefixedeffects. Column(3)andcolumn(4)weightheresultsbycountry-arm. Standard
errorsareinparenthesesandp-valuesareinsquarebrackets.
29

Table 2: Learning Outcomes for Government Scale Models
All Government Arms Nepal Philippines
(1) (2) (3)
Learning (SD) Learning (SD) Learning (SD)
SMS messages 0.074* 0.056 0.090*
(0.040) (0.061) (0.048)
[0.064] [0.363] [0.060]
Phone call and SMS - NGO 0.263*** 0.111* 0.434***
(0.046) (0.067) (0.057)
[0.000] [0.096] [0.000]
Phone call and SMS - Gov 0.314*** 0.170** 0.482***
(0.050) (0.067) (0.070)
[0.000] [0.011] [0.000]
Observations 4941 2625 2316
Control Mean 1.294 1.283 1.100
P-Val: NGO vs Gov 0.333 0.381 0.534
Country Fixed Effects Yes No No
Grade Fixed Effects No No No
Countries Included Nepal, Philippines Nepal Philippines
Notes: This table reports learning outcomes comparing implementation delivery models (NGO and Government). Learning
refers to how a child scores on four basic numeracy options: no operations correct, addition, subtraction, multiplication, and
division(measuredonascaleof0–4andconvertedtostandarddeviations). Column(1)poolsbothcountrieswherewetested
implementationscaleupingovernmentsystems. Column(2)showstheresultsforNepal alone, andcolumn(3)showsresults
forPhilippinesalone. Standarderrorsareinparenthesesandp-valuesareinsquarebrackets.
30

Table 3: Spillovers to the System: Changing Teacher Beliefs and Practices
Teacherpractices Teacherbeliefs
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Getparentsinvolved Targetstostudentlevel Wouldbeteacheragain Helpedstudents’learning
Teacherimplementedcall 0.088* 0.093** 0.158*** 0.106*
(0.050) (0.046) (0.045) (0.058)
[0.076] [0.043] [0.000] [0.067]
Observations 290 290 290 290
Controlmean 0.721 0.769 0.735 0.408
Notes: Thistableshowstreatmenteffectsonteacherpracticesandbeliefs. ThisincludesgovernmentteachersinNepalwhowere
randomlyassignedtoimplementthephonecallprogram. Fromall301governmentteacherswhowereintheschoolsidentified
bylocalgovernments,80percentexpressedinterestinparticipatinginthestudy. Ofthiseligiblepoolofgovernmentteachers,50
percentwererandomlyselectedtoimplement. Theendlineresponseratewas96percentandwasbalancedacrossthetreatment
andcontrolgroups. Column(1)showseffectsonteachers’beliefsthattheycangetparentsinvolvedintheirchild’seducation.
Column(2)showseffectsonteacherssayingtheytailorfeedbacktotheirstudentsbasedonstudent’sindividualunderstanding
andskilllevel. Column(3)showseffectsonteacherssayingiftheyhadtochoosetheirprofessionagain, theywouldstillbea
teacher. Column(4)showseffectsonteacherssayingtheybelievetheyhelpedtheirstudentswiththeirmathsskills. Theseare
alldummyvariablescodedas1ifrespondentsstronglyagreedonalikertscale. Standarderrorsareinparenthesesandp-values
areinsquarebrackets.
31

Table 4: Learning Outcomes by Country
India Kenya Nepal Philippines Uganda
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Learning(SD) Learning(SD) Learning(SD) Learning(SD) Learning(SD)
SMSmessages -0.020 0.049 0.090* 0.207***
(0.039) (0.065) (0.048) (0.057)
[0.606] [0.450] [0.060] [0.000]
PhonecallandSMS 0.212*** 0.085** 0.140** 0.454*** 0.891***
(0.067) (0.038) (0.061) (0.050) (0.054)
[0.002] [0.025] [0.023] [0.000] [0.000]
Observations 668 1985 2625 2316 1308
ControlMean 2.091 1.061 1.283 1.100 1.347
P-Val: SMSvsPhoneCall+SMS 0.004 0.096 0.000 0.000
CountryFixedEffects No No No No No
Notes: Thistablereportslearningoutcomesbycountry. Learningreferstohowachildscoresonfourbasicnumeracyoptions:
nooperationscorrect,addition,subtraction,multiplication,anddivision(measuredonascaleof0–4andconvertedtostandard
deviations). Standarderrorsareinparenthesesandp-valuesareinsquarebrackets.
32

Table 5: Learning Outcomes by Multiple Proficiencies
Division Innumerate Other Proficiencies
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
division no operations place value word problems fractions
SMS messages 0.030*** -0.007 0.000 0.030** 0.036***
(0.011) (0.013) (0.015) (0.015) (0.013)
[0.007] [0.586] [0.986] [0.046] [0.004]
Phone call and SMS 0.139*** -0.050*** 0.044*** 0.063*** 0.058***
(0.011) (0.011) (0.013) (0.013) (0.011)
[0.000] [0.000] [0.001] [0.000] [0.000]
Observations 6917 6917 7163 7163 7163
Control Mean 0.141 0.211 0.629 0.644 0.206
P-Val: SMS vs Phone Call + SMS 0.000 0.001 0.002 0.022 0.058
Country Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Grade Fixed Effects Yes Yes No No No
Countries Included 4 4 4 4 4
Notes: Thistablereportslearningoutcomesacrossdifferentproficiencies. Column(1)highlightsthelearninggainsintermsof
shareofstudentswholearneddivision. Column(2)showstheshareofstudentswhocouldnotcorrectlyansweranyofthebasic
numeracy operations (referred to as innumerate). Columns (3), (4), and (5) show the share of students who could correctly
answer place-value problems, word problems, and fractions, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses and p-values are
insquarebrackets.
33

Table 6: Robustness Checks on Learning Outcomes
Phone vs In Person Backchecks Random Problem Effort
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Learning (SD) Add Q2 Divide Q2 Learning (SD) Effort Task
Assessment Mode 0.063
(0.054)
[0.244]
Add 0.473***
(0.085)
[0.000]
Divide 0.653***
(0.029)
[0.000]
Random Order 2 0.064
(0.067)
[0.338]
Random Order 3 0.023
(0.067)
[0.734]
Random Order 4 -0.035
(0.067)
[0.596]
SMS messages -0.004
(0.019)
[0.822]
Phone call and SMS -0.021
(0.019)
[0.257]
Observations 1985 708 708 2617 5048
Control Mean 1.065 0.930 0.309 1.311 0.435
Countries Included Kenya India India Nepal 3 Countries
Notes: This table reports the robustness checks on learning outcome measurement. Learning refers to how a child scores on
fourbasicnumeracyoptions: nooperationscorrect,addition,subtraction,multiplication,anddivision(measuredonascaleof
0–4 and converted to standard deviations). Column (1) shows the results on average student level for assessments via phone
relative to the same assessment in-person. Column (2) and (3) show backcheck results on addition and division. Column (4)
shows results of randomizing students to receive different problems of the same proficiency. Column (5) shows results from
effortquestions. Standarderrorsareinparenthesesandp-valuesareinsquarebrackets.
34

Table 7: Learning During Other Education in Emergencies - Typhoon in the Philippines
TyphoonEffects
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Learning(SD) Learning(SD) Learning(SD) Learning(SD)
AffectedbyTyphoon -0.198*** -0.116**
(0.052) (0.050)
[0.000] [0.021]
Control×TyphoonEffect -0.228** -0.108
(0.114) (0.109)
[0.046] [0.321]
SMSmessages×NoTyphoonEffect 0.071 0.073
(0.074) (0.070)
[0.335] [0.299]
SMSmessages×TyphoonEffect -0.079 0.008
(0.086) (0.082)
[0.359] [0.923]
PhonecallandSMS×NoTyphoonEffect 0.433*** 0.439***
(0.080) (0.076)
[0.000] [0.000]
PhonecallandSMS×TyphoonEffect 0.203** 0.259***
(0.102) (0.098)
[0.047] [0.008]
Constant 1.334*** 0.631*** 1.166*** 0.463***
(0.028) (0.080) (0.062) (0.096)
[0.000] [0.000] [0.000] [0.000]
Observations 1647 1647 1647 1647
CountriesIncluded Philippines Philippines Philippines Philippines
Controls None EdandBslLevel None EdandBslLevel
Notes: ThistablereportstheeffectofatyphoononlearningoutcomesinthePhilippines. Learningreferstohowachildscores
onfourbasicnumeracyoptions: nooperationscorrect,addition,subtraction,multiplication,anddivision(measuredonascale
of 0–4 and converted to standard deviations). Column (1) shows the effect on learning of students affected by the typhoon.
Column (2) accounts for the baseline distribution and the caregiver’s education. Column (3) and (4) show the results of the
SMS messages alone as well as phone tutorial treatments with and without controls. Standard errors are in parentheses and
p-valuesareinsquarebrackets.
35

Table 8: Parent and Child Beliefs
Beliefsaboutchild’slevelandprogress Caregiver’sprograminterest
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Childestimateslevel Caregiverestimateslevel Childprogressed Wantsprogram WTP
SMSmessages 0.040* 0.075*** 0.010 -0.019 0.060***
(0.024) (0.024) (0.015) (0.012) (0.020)
[0.097] [0.002] [0.522] [0.127] [0.003]
PhonecallandSMS 0.210*** 0.114*** 0.104*** 0.034*** 0.045**
(0.023) (0.023) (0.014) (0.011) (0.020)
[0.000] [0.000] [0.000] [0.001] [0.025]
Observations 8798 9188 6188 8918 3777
Controlmean 2.347 2.285 0.350 0.968 0.434
P-Val: SMSvsPhoneCall+SMS 0.000 0.079 0.000 0.000 0.452
CountryFixedEffects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
GradeFixedEffects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
CountriesIncluded All All 4 All Philippines&Uganda
Notes: This table shows treatment effects on secondary outcomes related to parental and child beliefs, and demand for the
program. Column (1) measures the child’s belief about their level of learning, from beginner (0) to division (4), in standard
deviations. Column(2)measuresparentsbeliefsabouttheirchild’slevelonthesamescale. Column(3)showstreatmenteffects
onanindicatorvariableforcaregiversbeingveryconfidentthattheirchildhasprogressedintheirlearning. Column(4)shows
effectsonadummyvariablethatthecaregiverwouldlikeaccesstoaphone-basedmathstutoringprograminthefuture, and
Column(5)showstreatmenteffectsonadummyvariablethatcaregiverswouldbewillingtopaymoneytoaccessaphone-based
mathstutoringprograminthefuture. Standarderrorsareinparenthesesandp-valuesareinsquarebrackets.
36

Table 9: Child Non-Cognitive Outcomes
Non-cognitive Skills Wellbeing
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Perseverence Ambition Enjoys school Often worried
SMS messages 0.010 0.008 0.011 -0.001
(0.010) (0.011) (0.011) (0.011)
[0.308] [0.465] [0.310] [0.957]
Phone call and SMS 0.029*** 0.062*** 0.023** -0.020**
(0.009) (0.011) (0.009) (0.010)
[0.001] [0.000] [0.014] [0.043]
Observations 8962 8962 8880 8121
Control mean 0.833 0.211 0.821 0.244
P-Val: SMS vs Phone Call + SMS 0.042 0.000 0.201 0.060
Country Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
Grade Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
Countries Included All All All All
Notes: Thistableshowstreatmenteffectsonchildren’snon-cognitiveoutcomes,includingperseveranceandwellbeing. Column
(1)measuresimpactsonadummyvariableforwhetherthechildwantedtoanswerasecondriddlequestionafteransweringan
initialone,followingtheCarlanaandLaFerrara(2021)measureofperseverance. Column(2)measuresimpactsonanindicator
variableforwhetherthestudentwantedtoanswerasecondmoredifficultriddlequestion,indicatingambition. Thiswascoded0
iftheydidn’twanttoanswerasecondriddlequestionortheywantedaneasierquestion. Column(3)showseffectsonadummy
variable for whether the student says they enjoy school very much. Column (4) shows effects on an indicator for whether the
childhasmanyworriesorisoftenworried,fromthechildren’s“StrengthsandDifficultiesQuestionnaire”. Standarderrorsare
inparenthesesandp-valuesareinsquarebrackets.
37

A Appendix Tables
Table A1: Representativeness of sample at endline
(1) (2) (3)
Student is Female Student Grade Baseline Learning
Randomized to receive endline survey -0.005 -0.000 -0.009
(0.010) (0.010) (0.021)
[0.636] [0.985] [0.678]
Observations 16936 16936 12707
Country Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes
Countries Included All 5 All 5 All 5
Notes: This table reports balance on baseline characteristics of the sample that was randomly selected to be interviewed at
endline,comparedtothecompletestudysample. Column(1)showstherepresentativenessbysex,column(2)bystudentgrade,
andcolumn(3)bybaselinelearning. Standarderrorsareinparenthesesandp-valuesareinsquarebrackets.
38

Table A2: Reach and Attrition
Households Reached Correlation in Attempts
(1) (2) (3)
Reached at Endline Reached at Endline Baseline Learning
SMS messages -0.001 -0.001
(0.010) (0.010)
[0.913] [0.912]
Phone call and SMS 0.008 0.008
(0.010) (0.010)
[0.445] [0.430]
Number of attempts to reach HH 0.001
(0.005)
[0.889]
Observations 12331 12331 7187
Control mean 0.799 0.799
Country Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes
Grade Fixed Effects No Yes Yes
Countries Included All 5 All 5 All 5
Thistablereportsthedifferencesinthehouseholdsreached. Column(1)measuresthehouseholdsreachedatendline. Column
(2) measures the same but accounts for the students’ grade level. Column (3) shows the effect of the number of attempts to
reach a household to the baseline learning of the student. The control means show that on average 80 percent of households
werereachedatendline. Standarderrorsareinparenthesesandp-valuesareinsquarebrackets.
39

Table A3: Balance
Baseline Variables
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Baseline Learning Caregiver Caregiver Ed Student Grade Female
SMS messages 0.035 -0.009 0.020 -0.010 0.016
(0.027) (0.038) (0.021) (0.017) (0.012)
[0.190] [0.806] [0.356] [0.574] [0.181]
Phone call and SMS 0.007 0.008 0.008 0.017 0.004
(0.029) (0.036) (0.020) (0.027) (0.011)
[0.801] [0.827] [0.681] [0.522] [0.726]
Observations 9376 9599 8403 12331 12331
Control Mean 0.07 1.05 1.87 3.33 0.51
P-Val: SMS vs Phone Call + SMS 0.36 0.62 0.55 0.30 0.28
Country Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Grade Fixed Effects No No No No No
Countries Included All 5 All 5 All 5 All 5 All 5
Thistablereportsthebalanceacrosstreatmentgroupsatbaseline. Column(1)showsbalanceonbaselinelearning. Column(2)
showsbalancebasedonthestudents’relationshiptothecaregiver. Column(3)isbasedonthecaregiver’seducation. Column
(4) and (5) show the results considering students’ grade level and sex, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses and
p-valuesareinsquarebrackets.
40

Table A4: Heterogeneity
Caregiver Education Gender Baseline Level
(1) (2) (3)
Learning (SD) Learning (SD) Learning (SD)
SMS messages -0.042 0.110*** 0.064**
(0.111) (0.039) (0.028)
[0.703] [0.005] [0.025]
Phone call and SMS 0.206** 0.333*** 0.360***
(0.105) (0.035) (0.027)
[0.050] [0.000] [0.000]
Primary -0.010
(0.083)
[0.909]
Secondary Plus 0.304***
(0.078)
[0.000]
SMS messages × Primary 0.097
(0.127)
[0.448]
SMS messages × Secondary Plus 0.133
(0.116)
[0.253]
Phone call and SMS × Primary 0.215*
(0.121)
[0.075]
Phone call and SMS × Secondary Plus 0.120
(0.110)
[0.274]
Female=1 0.063*
(0.036)
[0.086]
SMS messages × Female=1 -0.053
(0.053)
[0.314]
Phone call and SMS × Female=1 -0.014
(0.048)
[0.773]
Baseline Level 0.234***
(0.021)
[0.000]
SMS messages × Baseline Level 0.037
(0.030)
[0.204]
Phone call and SMS × Baseline Level 0.040
(0.027)
[0.136]
Observations 7794 8902 7035
Control Mean 1.318 1.318 1.318
Countries Included All 5 All 5 All 5
Country Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes
Notes: Thistablereportsheterogeneoustreatmenteffectsonlearningoutcomes. Learningreferstohowachildscoresonfour
basicnumeracyoptions: nooperationscorrect,addition,subtraction,multiplication,anddivision(measuredonascaleof0–4
andconvertedtostandarddeviations). Column(1)showstheresultsbetweenhavingcaregiverswhoreachedprimaryeducation
or less and caregivers who reached secondary education or more. Column (2) shows the results between males and females.
Column (3) shows the results across baseline learning levels. Standard errors are in parentheses and p-values are in square
brackets.
41

Table A5: Potential for Crowdout
Caregiversupportedchildeduc Caregiverunemployment
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Dideducactivities Oftendideducactivities Unemployed Motherunemployed
SMSmessages 0.044*** 0.032** -0.019 -0.029
(0.009) (0.013) (0.021) (0.026)
[0.000] [0.013] [0.358] [0.271]
PhonecallandSMS 0.042*** 0.029** 0.012 0.019
(0.008) (0.012) (0.019) (0.024)
[0.000] [0.015] [0.513] [0.415]
Observations 8899 8899 3681 2446
Controlmean 0.865 0.494 0.429 0.429
P-Val: SMSvsPhoneCall+SMS 0.785 0.784 0.119 0.059
CountryFixedEffects Yes Yes Yes Yes
GradeFixedEffects Yes Yes Yes Yes
CountriesIncluded All All Philippines&Uganda Philippines&Uganda
Notes: Thistableshowstreatmenteffectsonoutcomesthatcouldindicatetheprogramcrowds-outorcrowds-inothereducation
andlabourmarketactivities. Column(1)measuresimpactsonadummyvariableforwhetherthecaregiversaystheydidany
educational activities with their child over the past 3 weeks. Column (2) shows how often the parent did any educational
activitieswiththeirchild3ormoretimesinthepastweek. Column(3)showseffectsoncaregiverunemployment,andcolumn
(4) restricts this unemployment estimate to households reporting that mothers are the primary educational caregiver in the
household. Standarderrorsareinparenthesesandp-valuesareinsquarebrackets.
42

Table A6: Trial Description
India Kenya Nepal Philippines Uganda
Samplesize 850 6724 3732 3492 2138
Randomlyselectedendline 765 3556 3351 3164 1495
samplesize
Studentgrades 3-5 1-2 3-5 3-4 3-5
NGODelivery ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
GovernmentDelivery ✓ ✓
Unitofrandomization Household Cluster-school Household NGO: Household
grade Household;
Gov: Cluster-
schoolgrade:
Stratificationvariablesused Student School Local NGO:Region, Student
inblockrandomization baselinelevel, Government, Student baselinelevel,
school,female Parent baselinelevel; Attends
perceptionof Gov: school, government
student grade,Student school,previous
baselinelevel baselinelevel education
program
participation
IncludedCombinedPhone Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
CallandSMStreatment
IncludedSMSonlytreatment No Yes Yes Yes Yes
Implementertype NGO(Alokit) NGO Government Government NGO(Building
public-private (Ministryof (Departmentof Tomorrow)
partnership Education), Education),
(NewGlobe) WorldBank, ResearchNGO
NGOs(Teach (Innovationsfor
forNepal, Poverty)
StreetChild)
Numberofweeksof 8 12 16 8 8
implementation
Dates Apr21-Jul21 Dec20-Apr21 Jan21-Jul21 Aug21-Jul22 Oct21-Jan22
Thistablesummarizesthekeyfeaturesoftheinterventionacrosscountries. Implementersoftheinterventionsincludedgovern-
menteducationministriesandNGOs.
43

B Appendix Figures
Figure A1: Weekly Household Engagement in Phone Calls
Notes: ThisfigureshowsaverageweeklyengagementofhouseholdsinthephonecallandSMSarm. Eachweek,engagementis
codedas1ifthehouseholdansweredthecallandengaged. ThisincludesdatafromNepal,UgandaandthePhilippineswhere
wehavedetailedandeasilycomparableweeklymonitoringdata.
44

Figure A2: Learning Losses & Gains - Can Divide, Uganda, by Grade
Uganda, 4 Uganda, 5
0.50
.5 0.48
.4
.3
0.21 0.22
.2 0.17
0.13 0.13
0.10
.1
0
Control
Phone
call
and
S
M
S Control
Phone
call
and
S
M
S
Baseline Division Endline Division
Notes: This figure shows the proportion of Grade 4 and Grade 5 students in Uganda that know how to correctly perform
division. Theshadesdistinguishthebaselineandendlineproportion. Ineachpanel,thetwobarsontheleftshowtheoutcomes
for students who did not receive the intervention; the two on the right show the outcomes for those who received the SMS
exercisesandphonecalltutoring. Thefigureshowsthatthereissignificantlearninglossforcontrolstudentsbetweenbaseline
andendline. Italsoshowsthatthereisonlyamodestincreaseintheyear-on-yearshareofstudentsatdivision-levelproficiency
betweengrades4and5inthestatusquo. Finally,itshowstheshareofstudentsabletoperformdivisioninthetreatmentgroup
both recovers learning loss and far exceeds the year-on-year progress in division proficiency, with treated students overtaking
thesubsequentgrade’sproficiencylevelatbaseline.
45

Figure A3: Timeline of trials
This 5-country study - launch of each country
Botswana Study Kenya Nepal India Philippines Uganda Final Endline
Mid 2020 Dec 2020Jan 2021 April 2021 Aug 2021 Oct 2021 July 2022
Notes: This figure shows the timing of the implementation across studies. The proof of concept study was conducted
inBotswanain2020. Itwasfollowedbyfivestudiesacrossfivecountries. Anendlineassessmentwasconductedafew
monthsaftereachimplementationperiodended;theendlineforthelatestreplicationwasinJuly2022.
46

Figure A4: Learning Curve – Improved Implementation and Targeted Instruction Across Trials
100
90
80
81.5
70
60 64.9
50
50.9
40
41.1
30
20
10
0
0.9
)%(
level
tneduts
ot
detegrat
yletaruccA
Non-targeted Botswana Nepal Philippines Uganda
Benchmark
Notes: This figure is adapted from Angrist et al. (2023) in the AEA Papers and Proceedings which uses monitoring data to
estimate how targeted instruction was across studies where enough monitoring data existed. Targeted instruction is defined
as whether instructors taught students at their level each week, and is then averaged across all eight weeks. For example, if
a child did not know addition and they were taught addition, the instruction was well targeted; if a child did know addition
but was till taught it rather than moving on to subtraction, instruction was not well targeted. Estimates are also included
fromtheBotswanaproof-of-conceptstudy(Angrist,Bergman,andMatsheng2022). Benchmarkestimatesfromcontrolgroups
of teaching at the right level studies (Banerjee et al. 2017) are also included to show how often instruction is targeted in the
statusquo. Theseestimatestracklearningoutcomeprogress,withlearningimprovingfromBotswana(0.12standarddeviations
wheninstructionwastargeted41.1percentofthetime)toNepal(0.14standarddeviationswheninstructionwastargeted50.9
percent of the time) to the Philippines (0.44 standard deviations when instruction was targeted 64.9 percent of the time) to
Uganda(0.88standarddeviationswheninstructionwastargeted81.5percentofthetime).
47

Figure A5: Maps of the Study Sample by Country
(a) Nepal
(b) Kenya
(c) Uganda (d) Philippines
(e) India
48