NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MATERNAL CASH TRANSFERS FOR GENDER EQUITY AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT:
EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM INDIA
Jeffrey Weaver
Sandip Sukhtankar
Paul Niehaus
Karthik Muralidharan
Working Paper 32093
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32093
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2024, Revised August 2025
We thank the Government of Jharkhand State Nutrition Mission for their support of this project,
and are particularly grateful to Mukhmeet Bhatia, Dr. DK Saxena, and Ajay Verma. We thank
Radu Ban, Abhijit Banerjee, Prashant Bharadwaj, Hoyt Bleakley, Joe Cummins, Ajinkya
Keskar, Abhijeet Singh, Dean Spears, Tom Vogl, and numerous seminar and conference
participants for helpful comments and suggestions. Hannah Blackburn, Thomas Brailey, Soala
Ekine, Burak Eskici, Stefan Faridani, Simoni Jain, Pankhuri Jha, Wilson King, Prerna Kundu,
Xinyi Liu, Frances Lu, Avantika Prabhakar, Sabareesh Ramachandran, Akanksha Saletore,
Mayank Sharma, and Prashansa Srivastava provided excellent research assistance and field
support. This study was registered with the AEA Trial Registry (RCT ID: 0002899). It was
approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the University of California, San Diego and the
Institute for Financial Management and Research, India. We thank the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation and the Cash Transfers for Child Health Initiative at the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty
Action Lab for funding this study. All views expressed are those of the authors and not any of
the funders or institutions with which they are affiliated. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w32093
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Jeffrey Weaver, Sandip Sukhtankar, Paul Niehaus, and Karthik Muralidharan. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Maternal Cash Transfers for Gender Equity and Child Development: Experimental Evidence
from India
Jeffrey Weaver, Sandip Sukhtankar, Paul Niehaus, and Karthik Muralidharan
NBER Working Paper No. 32093
January 2024, Revised August 2025
JEL No. D13, I12, I15, I38, O15, Q53
ABSTRACT
Cash transfer programs to women in India now reach over 130 million beneficiaries at an annual
cost of 0.6% of GDP, yet evidence on their effects remains limited. We study the impact of
unconditional transfers to new mothers in India using a large-scale randomized evaluation. Treated
households saw a 9.6–15.5% increase in calorie intake for mothers and children, along with gains in
dietary diversity and nutrient consumption. Gender disparities in food consumption narrowed. We
find significant gains in children’s functional development. While anthropometric indicators did
not improve on average, they may have in areas with better sanitation.
Jeffrey Weaver Paul Niehaus
University of Southern California University of California, San Diego
Department of Economics Department of Economics
jeffrey.b.weaver@gmail.com and NBER
pniehaus@ucsd.edu
Sandip Sukhtankar
University of Virginia Karthik Muralidharan
Department of Economics University of California, San Diego
and NBER Department of Economics
srs8yk@virginia.edu and NBER
kamurali@ucsd.edu
A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2899

1 Introduction
Reducing child malnutrition is a critical global development goal. It is important both intrinsically
for the well-being of affected children and instrumentally for boosting long-term human capital
and incomes in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs). Reflecting this, the UN Sustainable
Development Goals aim to end child malnutrition by 2030. Any strategy to achieve this must
address India, which is home to 24.6% of all stunted children globally (World Health Organization,
2023). As of 2019, 36% of Indian children under five were stunted (Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, 2022a), with malnutrition rates persistently higher than in many poorer sub-Saharan
African countries (Ramalingaswami et al., 1996; Klasen, 2008; World Health Organization, 2023).
The World Bank has called child malnutrition India’s “silent emergency,” and recent projections
suggest stunting is likely to remain above 22% even in 2047.1
Debatesoverpolicyhaveunfoldedalongsidedebatesoverwhyprogresshasbeensolimited. Since
1984, real per-capita incomes in India have quintupled, yet stunting has declined only modestly.
Potential explanations span the causal chain from income to child development, including: (a) ris-
ing average incomes may not have proportionately benefited the poor, among whom malnutrition
is concentrated; (b) the income elasticity of calorie consumption may be low (Deaton and Dr`eze,
2009); (c) consumed food may be low in nutritional value, either due to preferences for taste over
nutrition (Banerjee and Duflo, 2012) or poor access to nutritious foods (Khera, 2014); (d) intra-
household inequality in food allocation may disadvantage women and higher birth-order children
(JayachandranandPande,2017); and(e)poorsanitationmaylimitthehealthbenefitsofimproved
diets (Coffey and Spears, 2017). Uncertainty about the relative importance of these factors compli-
cates policy design. While well-targeted cash transfers may address point (a), questions about the
roles of (b)-(e) have fueled an inconclusive debate on the efficacy of such interventions (Narayanan
and Saha, 2020). A key limitation in this literature is the lack of studies with both exogenous
variation in income and detailed measurement of each intermediate step in the causal chain from
income to child outcomes.
ChildmalnutritioninIndiaisalsolikelytobeintertwinedwithlowfemalecontroloverhousehold
resources, as hypothesis (d) suggests. India ranked 131st out of 148 countries on the World Eco-
nomic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Index 2025 (World Economic Forum, 2025). Gender inequity
within households is an intrinsically important concern, underscored by recent estimates showing
large numbers of undernourished people—predominantly women and children—in non-poor house-
holds (Calvi, 2020; Brown et al., 2021). It may also inhibit child development through channels
such as reduced spending on child healthcare and nutrition, and poor maternal health, which is
strongly linked to low child birth weight—itself a key predictor of stunting.
Against this backdrop, India has seen a remarkable surge in cash transfers programs targeted to
women in recent years, from near zero in 2018 to 0.6% of GDP by 2024 (The Economist, 2025).
In principle, such transfers, especially when targeted to mothers, could yield triple dividends:
1SeeWorldBank(2013)forthequote,andMuralidharan(2024)forprojectionsbasedonthehistoricaltime-series
income elasticity of stunting reduction in India.
1

directly improving women’s welfare, enhancing maternal health and nutrition (and thus the health
of breastfed infants, as well as that of future children), and improving current child outcomes
by shifting household resources toward children. Yet it remains an open question whether these
transfersactuallyleadtomoreequitableintra-householdresourceallocationsorareusedinequitably
like other sources of income often are.2
With these questions as motivation, this paper reports results from a large-scale randomized
evaluation of a maternal cash transfer program in the Indian state of Jharkhand. The setting is
480 public early childhood care centers (anganwadi centers, or AWCs), representative of 90% of the
state. AWCs provide health, nutrition, and development services to mothers and children under
India’s Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) program. For this study, AWCs first regis-
tered pregnant women in their catchment areas, yielding a study sample of ∼2,400 women. Half
the AWCs were then randomly selected, and starting from their child’s birth, registered mothers
at these AWCs received monthly payments of Rs. 500, equal to ∼10% of average household con-
sumption. Transfers continued for two years for a total value of Rs. 12,000 (USD $170) and at an
annual value similar to that of India’s flagship maternal transfer program (Pradhan Mantri Matru
VandanaYojana). Mothersalsoreceivedmessagesencouragingthemtousethefundsfornutritious
food for themselves and their children, a typical feature of this type of program. Messaging was
implemented in a light-touch, low-cost way to facilitate scalability.
Our data collection captured each step of the causal chain from increased income to child devel-
opment outcomes. We collected unusually detailed consumption data, recording the exact quantity
of each ingredient in all foods consumed in the day prior to the survey. We combined this with
measurements of the quantity of food consumed by targeted household members, allowing us to
construct precise measures of nutrient intake for these individuals and the household as a whole.
Child development outcomes were measured at approximately ages one and three to capture effects
both during and after the transfer period.3
We report five main sets of results. First, transfers significantly increased household food ex-
penditure and nutritional intake for both mothers and children. Total household food expenditure
increased by over 11%, and the intended beneficiaries (mothers and target children) consumed at
least a proportionate share of this increase. Their caloric intake rose by 9% in the first year, and
14% in the second. Food quality also improved, as measured by dietary diversity and consumption
of key nutrients such as protein and iron.
Second, the treatment improved intra-household equity. Since maternal calorie consumption
was lower than the household average, proportionate increases in absolute calorie consumption for
mothersimpliedagreaterrelative increaseforthem. Thisresultedinmoreequalfoodconsumption.
2The tension is reflected in Duflo’s (2012) observation that “welfare agencies that restrict credit or transfers to
womenonthegroundsthatthemoneywillbeputtousegermanetodevelopmentimplicitlyrecognizethatwomenare
notentirelypowerless. Ifwomenwerepowerless,thenthemoneywouldbeimmediatelyappropriatedbytheirspouses,
andwewouldseenoimpactofdistributingthemoneytowomenratherthantomen. Conversely,ifhouseholdswere
harmonious entities where everyone had the same preferences and desires, then the nominal ownership of money
would not matter within the household.”
3Data collection after two years of the program was affected by the COVID pandemic. See Section 3.2.
2

Further, the treatment effect on maternal calorie intake in year 2 was nearly double the effect in
year 1. This is consistent with growing empowerment over time, perhaps because women became
more accustomed to receiving and collecting money (Field et al., 2021).
Third, despite these improvements in diet, there were no significant gains in standard child
anthropometric measures for targeted children (height- and weight-for age z-scores, or HAZ and
WAZ). Our estimates are precise enough to rule out gains larger than 0.10 standard deviations
(SD). The point estimates fall well within the confidence intervals from two recent meta-analyses
of the effects of cash transfers in LMICs, which report small and not always significant effects
of cash transfers on child anthropometrics (Crosta et al., 2024; Manley et al., 2022). However,
our estimates are smaller than some positive recent estimates from other LMIC settings, such as
Carneiro et al. (2021) in Nigeria and Field and Maffioli (2025) in Myanmar.
Fourth, consistent with Coffey and Spears (2017), we find suggestive evidence that sanitation
conditions may mediate the translation of improved nutrient intake into child anthropometric out-
comes. Comparing children in areas with better and worse sanitation (measured primarily by
neighborhood rates of open defecation), we see no difference in treatment effects on nutritional
intake, but find larger child anthropometric gains in treated areas with better sanitation environ-
ments,withthisdifferencebeingsignificantforWAZ.Interestingly,meanWAZincreasedby0.11SD
for non-targeted older children in treated households, without significant heterogeneity by sanita-
tion. The former result is consistent with increased caloric and nutrient intake by all household
members, and the latter suggests that the impact of poor sanitation in weakening the translation
of increased nutrient intake into child growth may be more pronounced for younger children.
Fifth, and in contrast with the effects on anthropometrics, we find significant average improve-
ments in children’s functional development. Using the standard Ages and Stages Questionnaire
(ASQ-3) to measure age-appropriate developmental milestones (Bricker et al., 1999), we find treat-
ment effects of 0.12SD at age 3 (p < 0.01), with gains in parental reports of cognitive, gross motor,
and fine motor skills. These are the first experimental estimates of the impacts of income trans-
fers on child functional development in India, and the effect sizes are similar to estimates for cash
transfer interventions in the literature from Latin America.4
Our results contribute to several literatures spanning cash transfers, nutrition, gender, and child
development, and also have direct policy implications (discussed further in Section 5).
Our first contribution is to present, to our knowledge, the first large-scale experimental evidence
on the impacts of unconditional cash transfers in India. Until recently, such transfers were rare in
India(Sukhtankar,forthcoming), perhapsreflectingpaternalisticconcernsthatthepoormayspend
such transfers “sub-optimally” (e.g., Khera (2014)). However, following substantial investments
in infrastructure for electronic payments, India has seen a sharp increase in cash transfers to
women in recent years. Such programs now reach over 130 million beneficiaries, at a cost of 2
4InLatinAmerica,Fernaldetal.(2008),PaxsonandSchady(2010),FernaldandHidrobo(2011),andMacourset
al. (2012) find effects ranging between 0.1 and 0.23SD on various child development outcomes from larger transfers
(ranging from $170 to $800, compared to $150 here) in Mexico, Ecuador, and Nicaragua. In Nepal, Levere et al.
(2024) find no significant effects on the same ASQ measure, albeit with smaller cash transfer amounts.
3

trillion rupees (USD 23 billion) (The Economist, 2025). Yet, there is very limited evidence on
the impacts of such transfers in India (Niehaus and Suri, forthcoming),5 and it is unclear whether
results from other contexts with different patterns of gender equity and intra-household resource
allocation will translate to India.6 Our results show that cash transfers to women significantly
improved several intermediate nutrition outcomes that policymakers care about––including calorie
consumption, dietary diversity, and nutrient quality––and are especially timely given the rapid
expansion of such programs.
Second, our results help clarify the puzzle noted by Deaton and Dr`eze (2009) that real food
expenditure in India remained essentially flat between the 1987-88 and 2004-05 rounds of the Na-
tional Sample Survey (NSS), and mean caloric consumption fell in this period, despite considerable
economic growth. These findings may have contributed to the concern that income transfers may
not move the needle on nutrition. We provide the first experimental evidence that, all else equal,
poor Indian households have a meaningfully positive income elasticity of food expenditure, and
caloric and nutrient consumption, at least out of income assigned to women. These results increase
the posterior likelihood that the pattern noted by Deaton and Dr`eze (2009) is driven by omitted
factors that may have reduced caloric needs over time (such as agricultural mechanization, reduced
physical intensity of labor, and lower disease burden).
Third, our results enable a comparison of the effects of cash transfers on food consumption to the
effects of food transfers themselves. We calculate that recipients’ marginal propensity to consume
calories from a rupee of cash transfers in our study is similar to the best available estimates for
a rupee’s worth of food transfers from India’s Public Distribution System, from recent results in
Gadenneetal.(2024). Thissuggeststhat—whetheronetakesthepaternalisticviewthathouseholds
should consume more food, or the non-paternalistic one that they should choose for themselves—
the distinction between cash and in-kind transfers may not be first-order with regard to food
consumption in this setting.
Fourth, ourfindingsreinforcetheargumentthatpoorsanitationmaybeakeyexplanatoryfactor
for India’s uniquely poor child health outcomes. Prior work has shown that levels of sanitation
affect child health by increasing susceptibility to intestinal disease and diarrhea, which sap the
body of nutrients and energy needed for growth (e.g., Esrey (1996); Checkley et al. (2004); Fink et
al. (2011); Rah et al. (2015); Spears (2020); Cameron et al. (2022)). We add suggestive evidence
of an interaction in the child health production function, where a poor sanitation environment
may limit the translation of improved nutrition into child growth.7 Combined with our finding
5Davala et al. (2015) find that cash transfers in India were spent well, but their study was limited to 20 clusters
(8 treatment and 12 control villages in the state of Madhya Pradesh) and did not report statistical inferences.
6For example, the relationship between income and child malnutrition appears to be meaningfully different in
India than the rest of the world (Ramalingaswami et al., 1996; Jayachandran and Pande, 2017), and studies tend to
find lower relative resource shares for women in South Asia than other contexts (Jayachandran and Voena, 2025).
As another example, the positive developmental impacts we find contrast with recent U.S. evidence: a major study
by Noble et al. (2025) found no effects from large, multi-year transfers, underscoring how similar interventions can
generate varying impacts across contexts.
7TheclosestrelatedstudyisGerusoandSpears(2018),whichfindsthatsanitationmoderatestheeffectofbreast-
feeding on child mortality. However, neither breastfeeding nor sanitation are experimentally varied, and mortality is
4

that food and cash transfers yield similar effects on calorie consumption, these results suggest that
policy should focus more on identifying constraints that limit the translation of nutrient intake to
physical development – especially those like sanitation, which involve significant externalities that
may lead to gaps between privately and socially optimal behavior.
Fifth, our results also speak to broader questions of gender and intra-household decision-making.
A large literature has documented that women in India (and other LMICs) are disadvantaged in
education, health, income, and leisure—likely reflecting lower control over household resources and
decision making (Duflo, 2012; Zimmermann, 2012; Calvi, 2020; Jayachandran and Voena, 2025).
Boosting women’s agency is thus both a national and global development goal. We find that
cash transfers labeled for nutrition and delivered into women’s accounts can disproportionately
benefit them, and improve gender equity. Methodologically, our detailed data on individual food
consumptionofferabettermeasureofintra-householdinequitythanclothing-basedspendingshares
typically used in the literature (Deaton, 1997; Dunbar et al., 2013); other work from South Asia
suggests that the household expenditure share on food is nearly ten times that on clothing (Brown
et al., 2021), making it a more meaningful measure of equity. Our results show that marginal
income transfers controlled by women may reduce intra-household consumption inequality, which
may be an important benefit from India’s growing use of cash transfers to women.
Finally, the fact that we find gains in child functional development, but not anthropometrics,
highlights the importance of considering a broader set of child development outcomes. Despite the
lackofgainsinaverageanthropometrics,ourfindinggainsoncognitiveandmotorskillssuggestthat
maternal cash transfers did improve child development. These gains may be especially important
in light of the possibility that, over time, “brains” may become more important than “brawn” for
children’s futures (Pitt et al., 2012).
2 Context & intervention
2.1 The ICDS program
The prevalence of stunted and underweight children in India is among the highest in the world,
and “has its origins almost entirely during the first two to three years of life” (World Bank, 2009).
The Indian government created the Integrated Child Development Services program in 1975 to
address the health, nutrition and developmental needs of children and mothers. ICDS services are
provided through 1.35 million anganwadi centers, where each AWC serves a catchment area of 500
to 1000 people and is typically staffed by one anganwadi worker (AWW) and one helper. The
AWW oversees the wide range of services provided at the AWC, including supplementary nutrition
programs, community health education, and immunization.
To improve nutrition for pregnant women, lactating mothers, and children aged 6 months to 3
years, the status-quo approach in many states has been for AWCs to provide ready-to-eat packets
of flour fortified with vitamins and protein (“take-home rations”). These are substantial, providing
a different margin of child health.
5

over 15,000 calories and 480 grams of protein each month, often in areas where such nutritionally-
fortified food is otherwise not easily accessible. However, doubts have been raised about the effec-
tiveness of this program, based on accounts of households giving the food to their animals rather
than eating it themselves (Malik, 2016) and high rates of leakage (Fraker et al., 2013). Reflecting
these doubts, India’s central government has introduced cash transfers as an additional instrument
through its Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana (PMMVY) scheme, which was launched in
2017 and provides a transfer of Rs. 5,000 to first-time pregnant and lactating mothers.
How much cash transfers will impact child development is an open question, echoing broader
uncertaintiesaboutthetranslationofincomegrowthintochilddevelopmentinIndiamoregenerally
(Jayachandran and Pande, 2017; Spears et al., 2022). As discussed above, the answer depends
(among other things) on the extent to which households spend additional income on food, the
nutritional content of that food, and which household members consume it. Further, the extent to
whichbothincomegrowthandincome-transferprogramstranslateintochilddevelopmentmayalso
depend on contextual and environmental factors mediating the nutrition-development relationship,
such as sanitation.
2.2 The cash transfer intervention
Our study is set in the north Indian state of Jharkhand, which was recently ranked as the second
pooreststateinIndiaonamulti-dimensionalpovertyindex(NITIAayog,2021). Childdevelopment
outcomes are poor: 39.6% of children are stunted, and 39.4% are underweight (Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare, 2022b). Among women aged 15-49 years, 65.7% are anaemic, and 26.2% are
classified as underweight on the Body Mass Index scale (Ibid).
Seeking to reduce these stubbornly high figures, the Government of Jharkhand (GoJH) decided
to test the impact of cash transfers to new mothers. For a period of 3 months, AWWs in the 480
sampled AWCs informed pregnant women in their 1st and 2nd trimesters in their catchment areas
that they were eligible to register to receive cash transfers. There were no further ex ante eligibility
requirements and no ex post actions upon which transfers were conditional. To register, women
were asked to fill out a one-page form and supply their bank account information and a photocopy
of their personal identification card. Assistance in registering for bank accounts was provided to
womenwhodidnotcurrentlyhaveone,includingthroughorganizedregistration“camps”,although
mostofthesamplealreadyhadanaccountduetothegovernment’sJanDhancampaigntopromote
universal banking access.
Eligible women were informed that some AWCs would be randomly selected, and that if their
AWC was selected they would receive monthly cash transfers of Rs. 500 (approximately US$7)
for one year.8 The resulting amount (Rs. 6000 annually) was selected to be similar in total to
8Atthestartoftheproject,thegovernmentwasuncertainwhetherfundingwouldbeavailableforasecondyear,
and so only informed potential beneficiaries about one year of transfers at the time of registration. After one year,
thegovernmentconfirmedfundingforanotheryear,andthetreatmentgroupwasinformedthattheirtransferswould
continue for a second year. However, given the large cash amounts involved, the set of registrants would have likely
been the same if the second year had been initially publicized.
6

related government cash transfer programs (PMMVY and the Janani Suraksha Yojana, or JSY).9
The randomization was done after registration to ensure that the universe of eligible women who
had registered for the program was comparable across treatment and control groups.
Panel A of Figure A.1 plots the distribution of wealth for women who registered for this program
as compared to all of rural Jharkhand.10 Although the sample of registrants is slightly wealthier
on average (0.15SD), it contains households throughout the full distribution of wealth in the state.
This is consistent with high rates of engagement with the ICDS system in rural Jharkhand, where
aside from the wealthiest 5% of households, over 75% of women report receiving supplementary
nutrition from their anganwadi centre during their most recent pregnancy (Panel B of Figure A.1).
GoJH began issuing transfers in the treatment group around four months after registration
closed, and so most beneficiaries began receiving transfers around the time of the child’s birth,
though some children were slightly older or younger.11 The program had aimed to deliver transfers
during pregnancy to aid gestational development, but this proved infeasible due to bureaucratic
delays. Such long payment delays are common in other Indian government programs: for example,
pregnant women are supposed to receive the first PMMVY transfer prior to their child’s birth,
but this rarely happens (Dr`eze et al., 2021; Sekher et al., 2019).12 Transfers were made into the
registered woman’s personal bank account and were typically withdrawn through in-person visits
tobankbranches(50%)orin-villagecommonservicecenters(37%), withtherestbeingfromATMs
or banking correspondents.
GoJH also delivered messaging encouraging registered mothers to buy nutritious food for them-
selves and their child. This occurred at two points. First, at registration, all mothers (regardless
of eventual treatment status) received flyers and a verbal message from AWWs. While the content
wassimilartostandardAWCmessaging,GoJHdeemeditnecessaryaspartofrecruitment. Second,
mothers assigned to treatment received monthly automated (IVR) calls delivering a recorded mes-
sage informing them that a transfer had been sent to their accounts, and offering child age-specific
suggestions on nutritious foods to purchase. Slightly fewer than half of beneficiaries received calls
each month, reflecting poor cellular connectivity in many areas; we show below that the calls had
limited impact and do not explain the observed treatment effects. Overall, the transfers should be
seen as unconditional but “framed,” though the framing and messaging around behavioral change
9Those programs differ from the one studied here in being conditional: JSY transfers (Rs. 1000) are conditional
oninstitutionaldelivery,whilePMMVYtransfersareconditionalonreceivingantenatalcare(Rs. 3000)andthefirst
cycleofchildvaccinations(Rs. 2000). Theseconditionsaimtoencourageinstitutionaldelivery,improvechildhealth,
and compensate for any lost maternal earnings due to pregnancy. Receipt of the transfer studied in this paper did
not affect eligibility for either JSY or PMMVY.
10ForarepresentativesampleofruralJharkhand,weusedatafromround5oftheNationalFamilyHealthSurvey
(NFHS), which was collected contemporaneously with our study (2019-2021). We construct an asset index based on
8 assets that were measured in both the NFHS and in our baseline surveys.
11Appendix Table A.14 tests for and finds no heterogeneity in effects with respect to child age at first transfer.
12One practical take-away from this study is that low capacity states may often struggle to deliver targeted
cash transfers within the window between formal registration of pregnancies and birth, presenting challenges for
government-ledcashtransferinterventionstargetingthein utero period. Inotherrecentstudiesinwhichcashtrans-
fers were delivered prior to birth, implementation was often done by NGOs (e.g., Carneiro et al. (2021); Field and
Maffioli (2025); Ahmed et al. (2025)) or the transfers were not based on the registration of pregnancies (e.g., in
Amarante et al. (2016) and Barber and Gertler (2010)).
7

was considerably lighter than in many other recent studies.13 The approach implemented here re-
flectsbothadesiretobuildonpaststudies’findingsthatinformationcanaffecttheuseoftransfers,
but also the reality that a less resource-intensive approach is needed for implementation at scale in
settings of limited state resources and capacity.
Implementing cash transfers in this context posed many challenges. Transfers were often system-
atically delayed by government fiscal processes, arriving more than one month late several times.14
Such delays are common in Indian government transfer programs, so these ITT effects are the
appropriate ones for policy evaluation here.
For logistical reasons the government implemented the project in two phases. In five districts,
registration began in October 2017 and transfers in March 2018. In the other three districts, these
occurred approximately six months later. We pool both phases for analysis since procedures were
the same and we do not observe significant differences in estimated treatment effects on primary
outcomes. Figure A.2 provides a full timeline of project activities.
3 Experimental design & methods
Our design and methods follow a set of registered pre-analysis plans: one for data from year 1, one
for data from year 2, and one that updated the analysis plans to account for how the COVID-19
pandemicshifteddatacollection.15 Thiswaspartofalargerexperimentthatincludedanadditional
480 AWCs allocated to two other treatment arms (receiving a year of transfers during either the
first or second year of the child’s life). This paper focuses on the two-year treatment arm, while
analysis of the other two arms is available in a separate report (Weaver et al., 2023).16
3.1 Experimental design
The study population was selected to comprise a near-representative sample of pregnant mothers
in Jharkhand. We randomly selected 8 of the state’s 24 districts, excluding 2 that already had a
maternal cash transfer program. Within each district, AWCs are grouped into “sectors” of ∼30
geographically proximate AWCs. We first randomly sampled 10 sectors in each district, and then
sampled six AWCs per sector, for a total of 60 AWCs per district, and 480 AWCs in total; 1.9% of
13For example, in Field and Maffioli (2025) and Levere et al. (2024), the messaging was delivered in-person on at
least a monthly basis.
14The April, May, June and July 2019 transfers were delayed until June 12, June 25th, August 1st and August
29th, respectively. November and December 2019 transfers were delayed until February 11 and February 20 of 2020.
March and April 2020 transfers were delayed until April 21st and May 28th of 2020 as a result of COVID-19. In
addition, approximately one-tenth of the sample experienced idiosyncratic delays beyond those described above at
least once due to problems with their bank account or documentation. These issues likely would not have been
resolved without the intervention of JPAL staff, highlighting the demands that even a relatively simple transfer can
place on government systems with limited state capacity.
15See https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2899
16Duringtheperiodsofcashtransferreceipt,theeffectofthetreatmentonnutritionalintakeandotherintermediate
outcomeswassimilarinallthreetreatmentarms. Ourpre-analysisplanreport(Weaveretal.,2023)providesresults
fromthefullsetofpre-committedanalysisforcompleteness. Thecurrentpaperfocusesondrawinginsightsfromthe
best-powered treatment, which was the one that provided transfers for two years as opposed to one.
8

sampled AWCs were replaced with another AWC via resampling (primarily due to inactivity of the
assigned worker), but all sampled AWCs participated. The sample is representative of Jharkhand
(populationof∼40million): whenthesesectorsarecomparedtotherestofthestateon26variables
from the 2011 census, there is only one statistically significant difference at the 5% level.
We randomly assigned half of the AWCs to receive two years of cash transfers and half to not
receive any transfers, corresponding to 240 treatment and 240 control AWCs with approximately
1200womenineachgroup. Therandomizationwasstratifiedbysector(withthreeAWCspersector
in the treatment and control groups), and further stratified within sectors based on the number of
registrations in the AWC. Figure A.3 shows the geographical distribution of treatment and control
AWCs. Conducting the randomized experiment in a near-representative study sample, with the
treatmentimplementedthroughexistinginstitutionalmechanisms,strengthenstheexternalvalidity
of results (Muralidharan and Niehaus, 2017).
Compliance with the randomization was high, with no women in control AWCs and nearly
all women in treatment AWCs receiving transfers. Administrative records state that over 99%
of transfers were made successfully, and we see this reflected in survey data, where treatment
households were around 70% more likely than control households to report having withdrawn
any money from their bank account in the month prior to the survey (Table A.1). Treatment
respondents were also more likely to state that they withdrew money from their account for the
specific purposes of daily expenses (typically food) and medical expenses, consistent with the goals
of the policy.
Table A.2 tests for balance on a pre-registered set of characteristics, grouped into three broad
categories: household-level characteristics, number of women who registered at the AWC, and
village characteristics as measured by the 2011 census of India. There was no baseline survey since
the target children had not yet been born, so we test household characteristics that are invariant
over the study period. We focus on characteristics that may be relevant to the implementation
of the program, such as poverty, sanitation environment, and difficulty of travel to pick up cash
transfers from the bank. Across the 12 tests, none of the differences between treatment and control
are statistically significant at the 5% level and the joint p-value is equal to 0.80. Table A.3 also
finds no differential attrition across treatment and control groups in any round of the survey.
3.2 Data collection
We gathered three rounds of survey data over the three years after the start of transfers (Figure
A.2 provides a timeline), with the data collection instrument changing across rounds to reflect the
relevant stage of child development. We surveyed the mother who registered for the transfers, and
collected anthropometric measurements of the mother, child, and other children in the household.
In the first year (Y1), we conducted a survey after 11 months of transfers. The household
componentofthesesurveysmeasuredspendingonfood;nutritionalintakeforthemother,child,and
household; child morbidity and mortality; and maternal health knowledge, stress and depression,
and empowerment. To measure nutritional intake, enumerators asked respondents about each meal
9

eaten the previous day. For every dish prepared at home, the enumerator recorded the ingredients
usedandtheexactweightorvolumeofeachingredient(seeAppendixCfordetails).17 Bycombining
theseintensivemeasurementswithdataonthenutritionalcontentofeachingredientfromtheIndian
Food Consumption Database (Longvah et al., 2017), our consumption-based approach provides
moreprecisemeasuresofcalories,protein,andmicronutrients(e.g.,iron)consumedthanapproaches
based on measuring purchases of food items, which require accurate unit cost information and
cannot account for at-home production of food (e.g., Subramanian and Deaton (1996); Gadenne et
al. (2024)). Enumerators also measured the quantity of the final dish consumed by the mother and
child, meaning that we can measure nutritional intake for those two household members as well as
per capita consumption of the rest of the household (by dividing the remaining consumption by
the remaining household members).
In the second year (Y2), we conducted an endline survey after 23 months of transfers to measure
the same outcomes as in Y1 as well as the cognitive/motor development of the child and weight-
for-age of one randomly selected sibling under age 10 (if any). The outbreak of the COVID-19
pandemic in March 2020 caused the suspension of field operations after 613 surveys had been
completed across four districts (21% of the sample). We then collected data over the phone for
households that had not been reached in-person. Instead of the more intensive method based on
measuring ingredients, the phone survey instrument asked whether the household had consumed
particularfooditemsinthepreviousday; basedonthis, wecanmeasurematernalandchilddietary
diversity (whether they had consumed foods from different categories) in the phone data, but not
calories or micro-nutrients consumed. We also were not able to measure anthropometrics, maternal
stress, or depression over the phone.18
From September to November 2021, we conducted a final round of in-person data collection in
all eight study districts during a period of low COVID-19 prevalence in Jharkhand (less than 0.1
daily cases per 100,000). Since this was approximately 1.5 years after the last transfer in five of the
districtsandayearafterthelasttransferinthreedistricts, thesedatameasurethelongerruneffect
of receiving the cash transfers and we refer to these as year 3 (Y3) data. This survey measured
height and weight for the target child, mother, and up to three randomly selected siblings under 10
years of age,19 the neighborhood sanitary environment (e.g., prevalence of open defecation), and
child cognitive and motor skills.
We use these data to investigate each link in the causal chain between income increases and child
development. We examine impacts on pre-specified measures of household spending, quantity and
quality of food consumption, and the allocation of nutritional intake within the household during
the period when households were still receiving transfers (using the Y1 field survey and Y2 phone
and field surveys). We also examine measures of child morbidity, maternal outcomes, beliefs and
health-seeking behavior, and interaction with government services.
17For food consumed away from home, we use estimates on the average nutritional content of those items.
18TableA.4examineshowlikelihoodofcontactoverthephonevarieswithrespondentcharacteristics(asmeasured
in the Y1 survey). 62% of households were contacted for at least one Y2 phone survey.
19This random sample accounted for 95.9% of all siblings in this age range.
10

Finally,weexaminewhetherchangesalongtheselinksinthecausalchainmanifestinthephysical
and cognitive development of the child. For anthropometric measures of physical development, we
measured height using stadiometers and weight using SECA-876 scales, the standard scale in the
nutrition literature. We focus on child weight-for-age (WAZ) and height-for-age (HAZ), standard-
ized into z-scores using growth charts from the World Health Organization. These anthropometric
measures are important measures of child development and have been shown to predict later eco-
nomic productivity (Currie and Vogl, 2013).
We measure child cognitive and motor skills development in year 3 using questions from the
Ages and Stages Questionnaire that are developmentally appropriate for this age group (ASQ)
(Doyle, 2020). This questionnaire asks mothers a series of questions about their child’s ability to
perform tasks across five categories—communication, gross motor, fine motor, problem solving,
and personal-social (e.g., “can your child count to 10?”, “can your child unbutton one or more
button on their own?”). Each question is assigned a maximum of ten points—with ten points for
a response of “yes,” five for “sometimes”, and zero for “no/never”—and these are summed for our
measure of cognitive and functional child development.
Table A.5 summarizes the outcomes of interest, and when they were collected. Our main anal-
ysis of these outcomes focuses on data from Y1 and Y3, as the much smaller sample in the Y2
field data significantly reduces precision. There is a high correlation between anthropometric out-
comes in Y2 and Y3 (e.g., a correlation of 0.845 for weight-for-age among children measured in
both rounds), so Y3 is likely a good approximation of what happened in Y2, as well as being of
interest in its own right. We also report results with respect to three pre-registered dimensions
of heterogeneity—sanitation environment (Coffey and Spears, 2017), which we specified we would
report if it meaningfully affected the interpretation of our results, as well as child birth order
and gender (Behrman, 1988; Jayachandran and Kuziemko, 2011; Barcellos et al., 2014), which we
specified we would report regardless of the results.20
3.3 Analytical methods
We estimate the effects of receiving transfers for two years using the following specification:
yt = β +βtreatment +ϕ +ϵ (1)
has 0 a s has
where h indexes households, a indexes AWCs, and s indexes sectors. In this specification yt is
an outcome measured in year t, treatment is a dummy variable indicating whether the AWC was
assigned to the treatment arm, and ϕ represents sector-level fixed effects.21 Given high rates of
s
compliance with the experimental assignment, we focus on ITT estimates. Standard errors are
20See tables A.12, A.13, A.14, A.15, A.16, and A.17.
21While additional control variables are not necessary given random assignment, the PAP proposed including
controlsselectedusingthepost-double-selectionapproachofBellonietal.(2014). Inpractice,enoughobservationsare
missingforthesecharacteristicsthatgainswouldbemorethanoffsetbylossesinsamplesizeandrepresentativeness.
We therefore prefer results estimated without controls, but results are similar either way (Table A.18).
11

clustered at the AWC level, the level at which treatment was assigned.
4 Results
4.1 Effects on food consumption and nutrition
We first examine impacts on food expenditure. Given high dispersion and a small number of zero
values (e.g. households not going to the market during the recall period), we apply the inverse
hyperbolic sine (IHS) transformation to spending amounts. Column 1 of Table 1 shows substantial
and significant increases in both Y1 (15 IHS points) and Y2 (21 IHS points). We find no increase
in reported “sin good” spending in either year (column 5), although we have fewer observations in
Y2 since we did not measure this in the phone survey. For non-food expenditure (column 8), which
we observe only in Y2,22 the estimated increase (19 IHS points) is similar to that for food (21 IHS
points), andwecannotrejectequalitybetweenthetwo(p = 0.83). Thedataareconsistent, inother
words, with homothetic preferences within the range of expenditures induced by the experiment
(at this broad level of disaggregation).23
This result is important in light of widely-discussed expenditure trends documented for example
byDeatonandDr`eze(2009),whoshowthatrealpercapitafoodexpenditureinIndiawasessentially
flat from the 1987-88 round to the 2004-5 round of the NSS, even as overall expenditure increased
substantially. As they point out, this puzzling fact must surely be part of the explanation for
the (equally puzzling) fact that caloric consumption fell over the same period. However, without
well-identified estimates of the causal effect of income on food expenditure in India, it has been
difficult to separate out preference-based explanations from other time-varying factors, such as a
reduction in caloric requirements—which in turn could reflect factors like a reduction in physical
labor intensive jobs or a reduction in disease burden. Our results provide the first experimental
evidence that we are aware of that, all else equal, poor Indian households have a meaningfully
positive elasticity of spending on food with respect to income—albeit with the important caveats
that the income was accompanied by messaging encouraging this and transfers were made to the
mother’sbankaccount, whichmayincreasethelikelihoodofusageformaternalandchildnutrition.
At the same time, not all of the incremental spending was on food, which is unsurprising given
the unconditional nature of the transfer. This may be acceptable or even desirable according to
standard notions of welfare, but a policy-maker narrowly focused on nutrition might see it as a
“tax” on the intervention. We can gauge the marginal propensity to spend on food from impacts
on the levels of spending (rather than IHS-transformed spending), although this is estimated less
22Non-food spending was not captured in Y1, due to a survey form error that caused this section to be skipped
and that was undetected until the survey was completed.
23Chen and Roth (2024) note challenges in interpreting IHS-transformed outcomes. Following their recommen-
dation, we also report results along both extensive and intensive margins in the remaining table columns (Table
1, columns 2, 3, 6, 7, 9 and 10). Effects are concentrated on the intensive margin for food spending, consistent
with more than 97% of households reporting non-zero food spending in each round. Results are similar using a log
transformation. Results are unchanged for sin good spending, and we lack power to decompose effects for non-food
spending, which exhibits more dispersion and noise than food spending.
12

preciselyduetothesignificantdispersioninthatmeasure. Theestimatesarenearlyidenticalacross
years (increase of Rs. 203.11 in Y1 and Rs. 207.96 in Y2; column 4 of Table 1), and when we run
a specification pooling both years of data, the estimated effect of the treatment on food spending
is statistically significant at the 5% level (Rs. 205.20, p = 0.038). This implies that around 41%
of the transfer was spent on food, which is similar to the share of food expenditures in the control
group and consistent with homothetic preferences.
Table 2 shows that increased food expenditure translated into substantial nutrition gains, both
overallandfortargetedhouseholdmembers(mothersandinfants).24 Dailycaloricintakefromsolid
foods increased by 40 calories (18%) for targeted infants and 141 calories (8.5%) for mothers in Y1,
and by 121 calories (14%) and 271 calories (16%) in Y2 (Table 2, columns 1 and 2). Non-targeted
members saw similar increases: 131 calories (8%) in Y1 and 96 (6%) in Y2 (Table 2, column 3),
with similar estimates when calories are translated into adult equivalent units (column 4).25,26
Dietary quality also improved for targeted household members. For both mothers and children,
we use a standard dietary diversity score from 0-7, capturing the number of distinct food groups
consumed (Ruel, 2003; Arimond and Ruel, 2004). These scores increased for both mothers and
targeted children in both years (Table 2, columns 5 and 7). We also find significant gains in an
indexofmaternalnutrientintakeinbothyears(column8),constructedasanaverageofthefraction
of recommended daily consumption met for key nutrients such as protein, visible fat, and iron.27
The increases are sizable: in Y2, child dietary diversity rose by 0.21SD, maternal dietary diversity
by 0.21SD, and maternal nutrient intake by 0.33SD.
These results also inform an answer to a central question in debates on food security, the relative
impacts on food consumption of cash transfers versus equivalent-valued in-kind transfers—such as
throughfreeorhighly-subsidizedfoodgrainsasinIndia’sPublicDistributionSystem(PDS)(Khera,
2014). We find that our estimates of the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) food out of cash
transfers closely match recent benchmark estimates out of food transfers presented by Gadenne
et al. (2024), who report impacts of past PDS expansions. While the samples are not directly
comparable—our study covers Jharkhand in 2019, whereas theirs covers major Indian states in
2003–2012—they are comparable in terms of real incomes (Rs. 79,873 vs Rs. 82,979 in per-capita
GDP). Our estimates imply a 131-calorie increase in per capita food consumption from a Rs. 500
monthly cash transfer (a 7.8% increase over the control mean). After adjusting for inflation and
transfer size, their estimates imply a 164-calorie gain from Rs. 500 worth of monthly food transfers
(a7.6%increaseovercontrolmean). Thismodest, statisticallyinsignificantdifferencesuggeststhat
24In Y1, nutritional outcomes were measured for all households. In Y2, caloric and micronutrient intake data
are only available for the 596 households for whom an in-person survey was completed. For other outcomes, we
supplementthein-persondatawithphonedataonpriordayfoodconsumption,whichallowsmeasurementofdietary
diversity and minimum meal frequency.
25Caloric needs differ by factors such as age and gender. Adult equivalent calories include an adjustment for age
and gender-specific caloric needs, enabling comparisons across households with different demographic compositions.
26DifferencebetweenY1andY2estimatesarenotduetodifferencesinsamples: TableA.6findstheY1estimates
are similar in the sample observed in Y2 (panel A) and the full sample (panel B).
27TableA.7presentseffectsonindividualnutrients,assome–suchasironandprotein–havebeenshowntomatter
more for cognitive outcomes (Roberts et al., 2022; Ip et al., 2017).
13

food and cash transfers to women may be fungible in this setting, with both likely yielding similar
increases in food consumption.
These estimates focus on the period when households were actively receiving transfers. However,
suchinterventionsmayinducelastingchangesviashiftsinnormsorinvestmentbehaviorthataffect
outcomes beyond the transfer period. To assess persistence, we measured a limited set of nutrition-
related outcomes during the Y3 survey, conducted 12–18 months after the final transfer. We
randomly selected one sibling of the target child and recorded their consumption of rice, roti, milk,
andfruit. Forthetargetchild,wecollectedthesamemeasures,alongwithegganddalconsumption
and a full dietary diversity index. Table A.8 finds increases in roti and fruit consumption for both
child and sibling, indicating sustained effects. Moreover, the increase in dietary diversity of the
target child remains comparable to that measured during the transfer period.
4.2 Effects on intra-household equity of food consumption
Beyond increasing caloric and nutrient intake for mothers and targeted infants, the results also
suggest that maternal cash transfers improved intra-household equity and maternal welfare. In the
control group, mothers consumed 17% fewer calories than the household adult average (1,657 vs.
2,002 calories in Y1). Even this likely understates inequity as we cannot measure what fraction
of those calories were expended in breastfeeding. The Indian Ministry of Health and Family Wel-
fare recommends 2500 calories/day for lactating mothers, which is 500–700 calories more than for
non-lactating women (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 2018). Yet, average maternal caloric
intake in the control group remained essentially unchanged between Y1, when 96% were breast-
feeding, and Y2, when only 64% were (1,657 vs. 1,646 calories). This suggests that households
were not adjusting maternal diets to account for the energy demands of breastfeeding. This may
be a contributing factor to high rates of child malnutrition in India, and is an interesting topic for
future research.
Thus, while the absolute increase in calories consumed was similar for mothers and other adults
in Y1 (141 vs. 131), the relative increase for mothers’ was higher since their baseline levels of
consumption were lower. In Y2, the maternal gains were even greater: 271 calories vs. 63 for other
household members (p=0.08).28 This pattern is consistent with increasing maternal empowerment
over time as women became more accustomed to receiving and using transfers (Field et al., 2021).
Accessing the funds also required recipients to travel to banks or cash points, since collection
typically required biometric authentication and could not be delegated. Thus, the treatment may
have also increased women’s mobility and autonomy, consistent with our finding of a significant
increase in a proxy measure of travel (taking children to the doctor) in Table 3.
Methodologically, our collection and use of detailed individual-level food consumption data also
28Wefocusontheadultequivalenceunitestimateforotherhouseholdmembers,asthisplacesthemonacommon
scale to the mother in terms of caloric needs. Since the point estimate is nearly 4 times higher, this difference is
statistically significant, despite the smaller sample of in-person surveys in Y2, prior to the halting of fieldwork due
toCOVID-19. Statisticalsignificanceissimilarwhencomparingtotheaveragecaloricintake(non-adultequivalence
units) of other household members in column 3 (p=0.08).
14

contributes to the literature on measuring intra-household equity. This literature has tradition-
ally relied on clothing expenditure shares to recover intra-household consumption weights because
clothingisanindividuallyassignablegood,anddataonindividualclothingspendingismorereadily
available in household surveys (Deaton, 1997; Dunbar et al., 2013). However, in the similar context
of Bangladesh, Brown et al. (2021) find that the average share of expenditure on clothing is ∼4%,
compared to ∼40% on food. Thus, equality (or lack thereof) in food consumption is a much better
measure of intra-household equity.
Overall, transfers caused mothers and young children to consume more nutritious food. This
is notable in light of recent concerns about intra-household allocation norms in Indian households
(e.g., Jayachandran and Pande (2017)).29 At the same time, a meaningful share of the transfers
was—as one would expect given the transfers were unconditional—spent on non-food items, or
on food for other household members. These facts underscore the point that cash transfers may
be a relatively blunt policy instrument for addressing specific nutritional deficiencies. This also
highlights that a comprehensive estimate of the welfare benefits of cash transfers to women would
need to account for the value of non-food spending.
4.3 Effects on other outcomes
Before looking at impacts on child development, we assess impacts on intermediate outcomes other
than food consumption that could play a role in the causal chain from the transfers to child
development. We examine both non-food spending, and design features of the program that could
have changed household behaviors.
First, non-food spending might also contribute to the goal of child development. Since children
in this setting typically do not attend preschool before age 3, we focus on healthcare. We find
that children in treated households were no more likely to fall ill (Table 3, column 6), but were
substantially more likely to be taken to a formal medical provider when needed (Table 3, column
5). Respondents (the mother in 90.5% of cases) also report that they were more likely to withdraw
money from their bank account for medical expenses (appendix table A.1). Together, these results
suggest that children were likely better cared for in cases of illness, and that mothers may have
experienced an increase in agency to do so.
Second, specific features of the transfer design may have led recipients to use them the way they
did. In particular, transfers were delivered into accounts controlled by women and accompanied
by messaging encouraging purchases of nutritious food. Columns (1) and (2) of Table 3 report
effects on outcomes plausibly shaped by these design features: indices of the mother’s nutritional
knowledge and empowerment. Nutritional knowledge is modestly higher in the treatment group,
andmaternalempowermentishigherinY1. Whilethesedesignfeaturesmayhavemattered,wefind
quantitatively that these channels do not “explain” much of the effects on nutrition. Multiplying
the estimated treatment effects on nutritional knowledge and empowerment by their cross-sectional
correlation with the nutrition outcomes in Table 2, the sum of these products is never more than
29See Spears et al. (2022) for a re-analysis of the data from this paper reaching different conclusions.
15

6.9% of the estimated treatment effect on nutrition.30
To assess the role of messaging specifically, we test whether treatment effects on nutrition were
largerformotherswholistedamobilenumberwhenregisteringfortheprogram, andhencereceived
IVR messages regarding nutrition. As shown in Table A.9, treatment effects on nutrition outcomes
are no stronger for these mothers, suggesting that the messaging had little independent impact.
This is consistent with the meta-analysis in Crosta et al. (2024, table 8), which finds no significant
effects of transfer framing on any child-related outcomes (including HAZ and WAZ). We do not
see significant effects on a pre-specified index of maternal depression, though point estimates are
in the direction of reductions (Table 3, Column 3).
A separate question is whether the treatment might have affected downstream outcomes like
anthropometricsthroughchannelsotherthanincreasedspending. Animportantalternativechannel
is uptake of other AWC services. While policymakers initially worried that cash transfers might
reduce demand for these services, they could also crowd them in; for instance, mothers might visit
AWCs to check on transfer status, even though no extra visits were required for either eligibility or
collection. Inpractice, wefindmarginalcrowd-in. InY1, thetotalnumberofservicesreceivedfrom
the AWC increased by 0.26, or 5.1% of the control mean (Table 3, Column 4). In Y2, the estimate
is smaller and insignificant, but this is more difficult to interpret due to travel restrictions related
to COVID and lack of power due to the much smaller sample size in Y2 (the standard errors are so
large that we cannot reject equality of Y2 and Y1 effects). Table A.10 reports the specific services
in which increases occurred in Y1 (in addition to nutrition information, discussed above), which
include deworming (6 percentage points(pp)), obtaining iron or calcium tablets (4pp), and signing
up for other government programs (6pp) such as the PMMVY scheme (4pp).31 From the point
of view of policy-makers, who generally wanted to encourage engagement with the ICDS system,
these are positive results, and may reflect greater trust and confidence in the ICDS system as a
result of receiving transfers.
As above, we estimate the share of nutrition gains that can plausibly be explained by these
channels by multiplying treatment effects on AWC service uptake by their cross-sectional correla-
tions with nutrition outcomes. This plausible upper-bound yields a modest figure: we find that
treatment effects on uptake of these services “explain” at most around 7% of the treatment effect
on any nutritional outcome.
4.4 Effects on anthropometrics
Given the increases in nutritional intake, one might hope to see improvements in children’s anthro-
pometrics. However, estimated treatment effects are small and typically not significant. Columns
30If, as seems plausible, unobservables are positively correlated with both nutrition and these measures, then this
exercise yields an upper bound on the share of the impact on nutrition caused by these channels.
31The PMMVY scheme is a cash transfer program for women who are pregnant or recently gave birth. Although
these estimates imply that treated households receive additional income from PMMVY, this only amounts to an
additional Rs. 268 relative to control households (Table A.10 - Column 11). This is only a 2.2% increase over the
value of the Rs. 12,000 transfers we study, and so not large enough to affect the interpretation of our results.
16

1 and 3 of Table 4 show insignificant effects on HAZ and WAZ in Y1 and Y3.32 Results are broadly
similar if we focus on thresholds for being stunted or underweight (Columns 2 and 4); there is a
reduction in the probability of being underweight in Y1, but the result does not persist to Y3.33
How do these results fit into the landscape of related work? Our estimates fall squarely within
the confidence intervals from meta-analyses of cash transfer studies globally (Crosta et al., 2024;
Manley et al., 2022). The point estimates from the meta-analyses tend to be small, especially for
outcomes of children under two,34 and the confidence intervals are wide, with limited consistency
acrossanthropometricmeasures(HAZ,WAZ,orstunting). Giventhewiderangeofstudiesincluded
in these analyses, with many relying on non-experimental methods, and wide variation in the cash
transfer amounts,35, we find it instructive to focus on studies more closely comparable to ours.
Three recent studies report significant mean effects of maternal transfers on child anthropomet-
rics: Ahmed et al. (2025) in Bangladesh, Carneiro et al. (2021) in Nigeria, and Field and Maffioli
(2025) in Myanmar.36 To benchmark our year 1, 2, and 3 HAZ and WAZ estimates against theirs,
we normalize estimated effects by the total amount of money transferred (in PPP adjusted 2010
US dollars) up to the time the outcome was measured.37 With just one exception (the Y1 HAZ
effects in Carneiro et al. (2021)), all point estimates lie within the 95% confidence interval of our
Y3 estimate; similarly our estimate lies within the 95% confidence intervals for all other estimates
(Figure A.4). Thus, statistically, our results are in line with that literature, as well as recent meta-
analyses (Manley et al., 2022; Crosta et al., 2024). Yet the confidence intervals are wide, implying
that the data are also consistent with the conjecture that there are economic or biological factors
that could make these settings meaningfully different.
To explore this further, we examine one key difference across these study contexts – sanita-
tion. Medical research shows that a poor sanitation environment can result in diminished physical
development through factors such as malabsorption of nutrients due to intestinal disease, loss of
nutrients due to diarrhea, and energy expended in fighting disease (e.g. Checkley et al. (2008);
Petri et al. (2008); Lin et al. (2013)). Spears (2020) shows that sanitation environment explains
a large fraction of international differences in child stunting, and that the higher prevalence of
open defecation in India can account for much or all of the excess stunting in India relative to
32Table A.11 shows similar results in Y2, but the smaller sample size limits power.
33We find no heterogeneity in impacts on anthropometric outcomes along the pre-registered dimensions of child
gender, age at first transfer, or birth order (Tables A.12, A.13, and A.14), consistent with a lack of heterogeneity in
treatment effects for nutritional outcomes (Tables A.15, A.16, and A.17).
34It is possible that sustained intervention is necessary to see these impacts; compelling evidence comes from
Cahyadi et al. (2020), who find that a CCT in Indonesia had no detectable impacts on stunting two years after the
start of the intervention, but large and significant effects of 23% six years afterwards.
35ImpactsperdollaracrossthesetofstudiesincludedintheManleyetal.(2022)meta-analysisarenotstatistically
significant for any anthropometric outcome, as per analysis shared with us by James Manley.
36We focus on studies that target children in the first few years of life as in the current paper, rather than those
that target slightly older children (e.g., Fernald et al. (2008); Paxson and Schady (2010); Macours et al. (2012)) or
outcomes at birth (e.g., Amarante et al. (2016)).
37Applying a normalization is important since the transfer amounts differ across studies. However, this may miss
important non-nonlinearities — for example, the larger effects in Carneiro et al. (2021) may reflect the relatively
larger transfer size, which induces increases in maternal labor supply that generate higher income for the household
even after the transfers end.
17

Africa. Hammer and Spears (2016) show experimentally that a sanitation intervention in rural
Maharashtra significantly improved child HAZ scores, consistent with other evidence from India
andothercontexts(e.g. Bleakley(2007);Cameronetal.(2019,2022)). Moreover, theManleyetal.
(2022) meta-analysis suggests that WASH (water, sanitation, and hygiene) communication allied
with cash transfers has stronger impacts on anthropometric outcomes.
Consistent with this literature, we find a strong link between poor sanitation and child develop-
ment outcomes in our sample. As a summary measure of sanitation environment, we construct a
principalcomponentsindexfromvariablessuchaswhetherthehousehold’sneighborsuseatoilet.38
Although these are measured post-treatment due to the absence of a baseline survey, the sanitation
index is not correlated with treatment status (column 5 of table A.3), suggesting that households
did not use the transfers on improved sanitation. Thus, it is still econometrically valid to analyze
heterogeneity with respect to it.39 The neighborhood is likely the right level for thinking about
effects of sanitation (Geruso and Spears, 2018), and the index is closely linked to neighborhood-
level open defecation—the R2 of a regression of the index on neighbor usage of toilets is 0.70. For
ease of interpretation, we construct a percentile-based index of the sanitation distribution, where
0 indicates the best sanitation environment (lowest open defecation rates) and 1 is the worst. In
the control group, moving from the best to worst index value is associated with a 0.33σ reduction
in WAZ and a 0.45σ reduction in HAZ, even after conditioning on household food expenditures.
Sanitationconditionsinourstudyareasarepoor. Figure1showsthedistributionofopendefeca-
tion across villages in Jharkhand as per the National Family Health Survey - Round 5 (2019-2020).
In the median community, 35% of households practice open defecation. A poor sanitation envi-
ronment may not only directly harm child development, but also dampen the benefits of improved
nutrition on child development; for instance, frequent incidence of diarrheal disease could limit the
retention of the additional nutritional intake enabled by the transfers.
Table 5 tests whether treatment effects vary with the sanitation environment. We estimate
treatment effects across the sanitation distribution (10th to 90th percentiles). For WAZ, effects
are significant at the 10th and 25th percentile of the“poor sanitation” index (panel A), and the
linear interaction of the sanitation index with treatment is statistically significant at the 5% level
(panel B). Patterns on HAZ are directionally similar, but not significant. The effect sizes on
WAZ are meaningful—a 0.12SD and 0.1SD increase in WAZ for communities at the 10th and 25th
percentiles of the sanitation index, which are comparable to results from other experimental cash
transfer studies.
This heterogeneity could explain the lack of significant average effects of the cash transfers on
38The full set of variables are the presence of either (i) observable feces, (ii) wastewater or (iii) an open sewage
ditch around the house; and the fraction of the household’s neighbors who (iv) own or (v) use a toilet. We prefer
the principal components approach to other types of indices (e.g. equal weighting) since the PCA weights account
for both correlations between thevariables and differencesin howmuch they matter for the sanitationenvironment.
See appendix C for more details on the index.
39Alternative data sets for measuring village-level sanitation are either too out of date to be useful (e.g., the 2011
census, which occurred prior to the large expansion in toilet ownership due to the Swachh Bharat campaign), only
have data for a small fraction of villages in our sample (e.g., National Family Health Survey), or only have data on
sanitation in schools rather than the full community (e.g., U-DISE).
18

anthropometrics despite comparable nutrition gains to other recent experimental studies that do
find significant anthropometric gains. Figure 1 shows that rates of open defecation were consider-
ably lower in those contexts (e.g., Field and Maffioli (2025) in Myanmar, Carneiro et al. (2021) in
Nigeria, Fernald et al. (2008) in Mexico): this ranges from 13.8% in Myanmar to 21.0% in Mexico,
equal to about the 27th percentile in our sample.40 When we restrict our sample to areas with
similar rates of open defecation, the point estimates are quite similar, consistent with sanitation
environment being a mediator of the nutrition-anthropometric relationship.41
We also examine anthropometric impacts on older siblings (under age 10) of targeted infants, a
secondaryoutcomeinourpre-analysisplan). SiblingWAZincreasedby0.11σ inY3(p < 0.05), and
by a similar 0.13σ in Y2 (Table 6). We similarly find a 10 percentage point decline in the likelihood
of being moderately underweight in Y2 (column 4, p < 0.05), though the Y2 WAZ estimate is
statistically insignificant, likely due to the much smaller sample size (standard errors are twice as
large in Y3 — 0.10 vs. 0.05).42. Estimated effects on HAZ in year 3 are positive (at 0.07σ), but not
significant, though they are also not significantly different from the WAZ effects; height was not
measured in Y2. These findings are consistent with the increased caloric intake for all household
members (Table 2, column 3), and provide valuable evidence to the child nutrition literature that
“catch up” growth of children is possible.43 They also highlight that cash transfer programs can
have broad benefits beyond those directly targeted by policymakers. For instance, while we do not
measure education outcomes for older siblings, it is plausible that some of the transfers may have
also been spent on their education.
Interestingly, we do not find significant heterogeneity with respect to sanitation for sibling an-
thropometric outcomes (Table A.19). This is consistent with evidence on age-based differences in
vulnerability to poor sanitation: the loss of nutrients from diarrhea, which is strongly positively
correlated with the prevalence of open defecation (Lin et al., 2013), has been shown to be more
costly for the physical growth of younger children (Nasrin et al., 2023). Similarly, Adukia (2017)
findsthathealthbenefitsfromschoollatrineconstructionareconcentratedamongyoungerchildren,
who are more susceptible to disease.
Therearetwomainnuancesinvolvedininterpretingtheheterogeneitywithrespecttosanitation.
First, treatment effects on nutritional intake itself could vary by sanitation quality. For instance,
areas with better sanitation may also be areas where women have more influence in how money
is used, or have easier access to payments. To test this, we examine whether treatment effects on
40We calculate open defecation rates from the DHS round for the country closest to the time of the study, using
sub-national data to match the regions studied.
41ThisfindingalsoarguesagainsttheroleofgeneticsinthehighratesofstuntingamongIndianchildrenasposited
by Panagariya (2013), consistent with work showing that the height of young children born in England to Indian
migrants is similar to that of native English children (Alacevich and Tarozzi, 2017).
42In a similar context (Nepal), Levere et al. (2024) find suggestive but mostly insignificant WAZ effects for non-
targeted siblings, although they are underpowered to detect statistically significant effects due to an ∼85% smaller
sample of siblings (245 older siblings as compared to 1,945 target children in their study).
43The child nutrition literature has focused extensively on the first 1000 days of life (in utero to age 2) as the
critical period for nutrition interventions. However, this does not imply that “catch up” growth in later years is not
possible. Yet, there is much less experimental evidence on the possibility of such catch-up growth. See Singh et al.
(2014) and Ganimian et al. (2024) for further discussion.
19

food expenditure, maternal or child consumption, or related outcomes vary with sanitation. Table
A.20 shows that they do not, suggesting that sanitation is mediating how nutritional improvements
translate into anthropometric gains rather than influencing nutritional intake levels.
Second,sanitationcouldproxyforothercorrelatedfactorsthatinfluencethetranslationofincome
into child growth. This would not matter for the policy question of where to target cash transfers
to promote child development, as that is simply a prediction problem. But it would matter for
inferences about what complementary interventions are most likely to amplify the effects of cash
transfers. To explore this issue further, we replace our sanitation index with its residual after
regressing it on a set of seven observable variables selected using LASSO for their ability to predict
the index.44 Results using this residualized regressor (Table A.21) are larger and more statistically
significant than the original ones. While it is possible that unobserved correlates of sanitation
affect the income-growth translation, the fact that results strengthen after removing observables,
supports the interpretation that the same nutritional intake yields less child growth in less sanitary
environments.
Theidealdesignforexperimentallytestingifinteractionsaresignificantwouldbeafullysaturated
design with a cash-only arm, a sanitation-only arm, and a combined arm. However, this would
require a very large sample to be adequately powered to detect interactions (Muralidharan et al.,
2023). CalculationsinAppendixBshowthatadesignwith80%powertodetectinteractionswould
require at least 6,000 clusters (Figure B.1). This is an order of magnitude larger than any similar
fieldexperimentswithwhichwearefamiliar,andover12timeslargerthanourcurrentstudy. Given
these constraints, the approach of interacting experimental income variation with cross-sectional
variation in sanitation may be the most practicable way of testing for complementarities between
income and sanitation in reducing child stunting.
4.5 Additional measures of children’s development
Much of the research in India on how nutritional and health interventions affect child development
has focused on anthropometrics (e.g., Hammer and Spears, 2016; Cameron et al., 2022). We
augment this by analyzing effects on an index of child development milestones. We use the parent-
reported Ages and Stages Questionnaire (ASQ), which measures important milestones for gross
motor, fine motor and cognitive development. The ASQ has been shown to correlate well with
clinical evaluations of child development via direct observations by trained psychologists.45 We
find a positive treatment effect of 0.12σ (p < 0.01) on ASQ scores (Table 4, column 5), which is
equivalent to 19.5% of the control-group difference between children in the poorest and wealthiest
quartiles (as measured by an asset index).
44These variables are selected from a larger list of fourteen variables using LASSO. The selected variables are:
indicators for whether the household head is Muslim, Christian, below the poverty line, or a member of a scheduled
caste or tribe, respondent education level, household size, and child gender.
45For children ∼3 years (as in our study at the time of ASQ administration), Schonhaut et al. (2013) find a
correlationof0.75betweenASQanddirectobservationusingthe“gold-standard”BayleyScalesofInfantandToddler
Development. Attanasio et al. (2016) find slightly lower, but still moderate to high correlations across ASQ sub-
components in a developing country context.
20

Further, we see gains in every sub-component of the ASQ across cognitive, gross motor and fine
motor skills (Table A.23). Targeted children in treated households were reported as more likely
to be able to perform tasks such as saying their own name, counting to 5, serving themselves
food, holding a pen correctly, folding paper, and drawing a basic figure (Table A.22, Panels A-C)
(Schonhaut et al., 2013; Macours et al., 2012).46 Taken together, these impacts across a broad
range of indicators suggest that improved nutritional intake for mothers and children translated
into accelerated child development.47
Thesefindingsareconsistentwithexperimentalstudiesinothercontextsthathavefoundpositive
links between cash transfers in early childhood and cognitive development (Paxson and Schady,
2010; Macours et al., 2012; Gilligan and Roy, 2013; Barham et al., 2013). The increased nutritional
intake we saw above is of course one likely underlying mechanism, but other channels could also
matter. Parental involvement, for example, is strongly correlated with child development (e.g.,
Bono et al., 2016) and could respond positively to cash transfers, through both greater parental
time to engage with children’s learning activities and ability to purchase toys and play materials
for children – as shown in the US context by Gennetian et al. (2024).
5 Policy Implications and Conclusion
Our results contribute to several active policy debates in India and globally including: (a) the
impactsofcashtransfersonfoodconsumption, (b)therelativeimpactsofcashvs. in-kindtransfers
onfoodconsumption,(c)theeffectsofcashtransferstowomenongenderequityandempowerment,
(d) the impact of maternal cash transfers on child development, and (e) priorities for policy actions
to accelerate progress on reducing child malnutrition. We discuss each of these below.
The first policy question we speak to is to address doubts about whether cash transfers would
improve food consumption and nutrient intake—especially for women and children. Reasons for
skepticism include concerns that expansion of household budget sets may not necessarily translate
into more spending on food (Deaton and Dr`eze, 2009), that households cannot access or would
not select nutritious food (Banerjee and Duflo, 2012), or that intra-household dynamics of resource
allocation may limit the benefits for mothers and young children (Jayachandran and Pande, 2017).
Our results provide the first large-scale experimental evidence from India on this question, and
show that cash transfers to women significantly increased food expenditure, calorie consumption,
46Whileexperimenterdemandeffectsareapotentialconcerninparent-reportedoutcomes,theyseemunlikelyhere
for a few reasons. First, we observe treatment effects even on outcomes that could be directly observed by the
surveyors,suchasthechildabilitytosaytheirnameorservethemselves. Wedonotseeuniformlyinflatedresponses
orstrongereffectsfororharder-to-observequestions: wecanrejectequivalenceofestimatesacrossoutcomesintable
A.22, and observe effects on objective questions such as ability to count to 5. Second, the ASQ was administered in
Y3 over a year after the transfers had ceased, so the incentives to differentially misreport child development across
treatmentandcontrolshouldbeattenuated. Finally,thetreatmentgroupisnottoldthatoutcomesaremeasuredin
a control group and compared to theirs to evaluate the program. Thus experimenter demand effects seem unlikely
here, even if they are plausible in settings where the control and treatment groups are more visible to one another.
47We do not find a significant effect on the Y2 child development index (Table A.11). However, this index used
fewerquestions,reliedonphonesurveys,andhadasmallersample,andtheanalysisisthereforeunderpowered. The
Y2 and Y3 questions were tailored to age, and so they have only one question in common.
21

dietary diversity, and nutrient intake—for both households as a whole, and for targeted mothers
and children. We also show that the share of transfers spent on food closely mirrors the food share
of household spending in the control group, consistent with homothetic preferences and implying
proportionate increases in food and non-food spending.
Second, our results help to answer a central question in food security debates: how does the
MPC of food out of cash transfers compare with that from equivalent-valued in-kind transfers.
We find that we cannot reject equality between the MPC of food out of cash transfers in our
study, and recent estimates for in-kind transfers from the PDS by Gadenne et al. (2024). This is
unsurprising, since the value of in-kind transfers through the PDS is well below most households’
food expenditure, making them infra-marginal for 93% of households Gadenne et al. (2024). Yet,
this equivalence has not been empirically shown in India due to lack of experimental evidence on
the MPC of food out of income transfers.48
Third, the rapid expansion of cash transfer programs to women in India—currently reaching an
estimated134millionwomenatacostof0.6%ofGDP—hasmadethemthesecond-largest category
of welfare spending in India, after the PDS, and surpassing the National Rural Employment Guar-
antee Scheme (NREGS). While this expansion has been largely politically driven (The Economist,
2025), there is little evidence on their impacts on consumption, intra-household equity, or down-
stream outcomes. Our results contribute timely experimental evidence, and show that labeled cash
transfers to women not only increased their food and nutrient intake (and that of their household),
but also improved intra-household gender equity in food consumption and other measures of female
agency. Given the large gender inequity in India, these findings are intrinsically important, and
highlight the potential for cash transfers to women to improve gender equity.
Fourth, maternal cash transfers also improved child development. We find a significant 0.12SD
increase in an index of functional development for the targeted child, with improvements on all
componentsoftheindex. Thesemaybeevenmoreimportantforlong-termoutcomesthanphysical
development as labor markets evolve to reward “brains” more than “brawn” (Pitt et al., 2012). We
alsoobserveimprovedanthropometricoutcomes(WAZ-scores)foroldersiblingsoftargetedchildren,
consistent with the increase in mean household caloric and nutrient intake. For the targeted child,
we find no average gains in anthropometric measures, but do find suggestive evidence of positive
WAZ effects in areas in the top quartile of neighborhood sanitation quality. It is also worth noting
that these positive developmental impacts contrast sharply with recent results from the United
States, where a highly anticipated study by Noble et al. (2025) of large transfers delivered over the
course of four years found no effects on measures of child development, further highlighting how
48Note that the interpretation of any difference in the MPC of food out of cash versus food transfers depends on
one’s normative views. If one respects household preferences, higher food consumption from food transfers implies
distortionandwouldjustifycashtransfers. Ifonebelievesthathouseholdsunder-consumefood—say, duetolimited
understanding of long-term benefits, or self-control issues—then food transfers may be preferable (see Gadenne and
Singhal (forthcoming) for a more detailed discussion). Our finding of comparable MPCs suggests that paternalists
need not be too concerned about cash transfers (at least when made to women and framed as done here), and that
pure altruists need not be too concerned about food transfers. Note that in-kind programs like Take Home Rations,
which target specific nutrients, may be less fungible than PDS grains, which are staple commodities.
22

similar interventions can have different impacts across contexts, and the importance of context-
specific evidence to inform policy decisions.
Finally, our results can inform policies to reduce child malnutrition. Policy efforts to date have
focused on improving child feeding in poor households, with debates centered on the form of
redistribution – especially cash vs. in-kind. Our findings suggest another concern: even when
child nutritional intake improves (via cash or kind), impacts on anthropometric outcomes may be
limited due to contextual factors such as poor sanitation. The case for policy focus on sanitation
is strengthened because poor households are likely to under-invest in it relative to socially optimal
levels. Whilerisingincomesenablegreaterspendingonbothfoodandsanitation, thelatterislikely
to grow slower than socially optimal due to two classic reasons for underinvestment: (a) households
may not internalize the positive externalities from reduced open defecation, and (b) high fixed
costs of constructing effective toilets.49 Both externalities and fixed costs due to indivisibility of
capital goods are classic explanations in development economics for low investment in high-return
technologies (Murphy et al., 1989). Our results emphasize the need to build on recent government
initiatives, and sustain efforts to improve sanitation and toilet use to accelerate the translation of
India’s income gains into gains in child development.
Taken together, our results suggest that maternal cash transfers can meaningfully improve sev-
eral outcomes that policy makers care about, including food and nutrient consumption by mothers,
children, and all household members; use of ICDS services and formal medical care for children;
intra-household gender equity; infant functional development, and anthropometrics for older sib-
lings. One way to enhance their impact on infant anthropometrics may be to identify areas with
high child malnutrition and coordinate cash transfers with efforts to improve sanitation. Such
coordination may be especially important because these programs are typically implemented by
different government departments.
Fromapolicyperspective, ourresultsmayunderestimatetheaggregateeconomicbenefitsofcash
transfer programs to women, because they come from an experiment designed to study impacts on
recipients as opposed to general equilibrium effects. However, large-scale cash transfer programs to
women—as currently being implemented in many Indian states—are likely to generate such effects
through aggregate demand externalities, which may amplify the benefits as found in Kenya by
(Egger et al., 2022). Studying these in other contexts is an important area for future research.
49The most cost-effective toilet of high-enough quality to sequester fecal matter is a twin-pit toilet, which costs at
least Rs. 12,000. This is over two months of household consumption in our setting.
23

References
Adukia, Anjali, “Sanitation and education,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
2017, 9 (2), 23–59.
Ahmed, Akhter, John Hoddinott, and Shalini Roy, “Food transfers, cash transfers, behav-
ior change communication and child nutrition: evidence from Bangladesh,” The World Bank
Economic Review, 2025, 39 (2), 439–472.
Alacevich, Caterina and Alessandro Tarozzi, “Child height and intergenerational transmis-
sion of health: evidence from ethnic Indians in England,” Economics & Human Biology, 2017,
25, 65–84.
Amarante, Ver´onica, Marco Manacorda, Edward Miguel, and Andrea Vigorito, “Do
cash transfers improve birth outcomes? Evidence from matched vital statistics, program, and
social security data,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2016, 8 (2), 1–43.
Arimond, Mary and Marie T Ruel, “Dietary diversity is associated with child nutritional
status: evidence from 11 demographic and health surveys,” The Journal of Nutrition, 2004, 134
(10), 2579–2585.
Attanasio, Orazio, Marta Rubio-Codina, M Caridad Araujo, Pablo Mun˜oz, and Sally
Grantham-McGregor, “Concurrent validity and feasibility of short tests currently used to
measure early childhood development in large scale studies,” PloS One, 2016, 11 (8), e0160962.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duflo, Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to
Fight Global Poverty, Public Affairs, 2012.
Barber, Sarah L and Paul J Gertler, “Empowering women: how Mexico’s conditional cash
transfer programme raised prenatal care quality and birth weight,” Journal of development ef-
fectiveness, 2010, 2 (1), 51–73.
Barcellos, Silvia Helena, Leandro S Carvalho, and Adriana Lleras-Muney, “Childgender
and parental investments in India: Are boys and girls treated differently?,” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 2014, 6 (1), 157–89.
Barham, Tania, Karen Macours, and John A Maluccio, “Boys’ cognitive skill formation
and physical growth: Long-term experimental evidence on critical ages for early childhood inter-
ventions,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (3), 467–71.
Behrman, Jere R, “Nutrition, health, birth order and seasonality: Intrahousehold allocation
among children in rural India,” Journal of Development Economics, 1988, 28 (1), 43–62.
Belloni, Alexandre, VictorChernozhukov, andChristianHansen,“InferenceonTreatment
EffectsafterSelectionamongHigh-DimensionalControls,” Review of Economic Studies, 112014,
81 (2), 608–650.
Bleakley, Hoyt,“Diseaseanddevelopment: evidencefromhookwormeradicationintheAmerican
South,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (1), 73–117.
Bono, Emilia Del, Marco Francesconi, Yvonne Kelly, and Amanda Sacker, “Early Ma-
ternal Time Investment and Early Child Outcomes,” The Economic Journal, 12 2016, 126 (596),
F96–F135.
24

Bricker, Diane, Jane Squires, Linda Mounts, LaWanda Potter, Robert Nickel, Eliza-
beth Twombly, and Jane Farrell, Ages and stages questionnaire, Baltimore, MD: Paul H.
Brookes, 1999.
Brown, Caitlin, Rossella Calvi, and Jacob Penglase, “Sharing the pie: An analysis of
undernutrition and individual consumption in Bangladesh,” Journal of Public Economics, 2021,
200, 104460.
Cahyadi, Nur, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A Olken, Rizal Adi Prima, Elan Satriawan,
and Ekki Syamsulhakim, “Cumulative impacts of conditional cash transfer programs: Exper-
imental evidence from Indonesia,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2020, 12 (4),
88–110.
Calvi, Rossella, “Why are older women missing in India? The age profile of bargaining power
and poverty,” Journal of Political Economy, 2020, 128 (7), 2453–2501.
Cameron, Lisa, Paul Gertler, Manisha Shah, Maria Laura Alzua, Sebastian Martinez,
and Sumeet Patil, “The dirty business of eliminating open defecation: The effect of village
sanitation on child height from field experiments in four countries,” Journal of Development
Economics, 2022, 159, 102990.
, Susan Olivia, and Manisha Shah, “Scaling up sanitation: Evidence from an RCT in
Indonesia,” Journal of Development Economics, 2019, 138, 1–16.
Carneiro, Pedro, Lucy Kraftman, Giacomo Mason, Lucie Moore, Imran Rasul, and
Molly Scott, “The impacts of a multifaceted prenatal intervention on human capital accumu-
lation in early life,” American Economic Review, 2021, 111 (8), 2506–49.
Checkley, William, Gillian Buckley, Robert H Gilman, Ana MO Assis, Richard L
Guerrant, Saul S Morris, K˚are Mølbak, Palle Valentiner-Branth, Claudio F Lanata,
Robert E Black et al., “Multi-country analysis of the effects of diarrhoea on childhood stunt-
ing,” International Journal of Epidemiology, 2008, 37 (4), 816–830.
, Robert H Gilman, Robert E Black, Leonardo D Epstein, Lilia Cabrera, Charles R
Sterling, and Lawrence H Moulton, “Effect of water and sanitation on childhood health in
a poor Peruvian peri-urban community,” The Lancet, 2004, 363 (9403), 112–118.
Chen, Jiafeng and Jonathan Roth, “Logs with zeros? Some problems and solutions,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2024, 139 (2), 891–936.
Coffey, Diane and Dean Spears, Where India goes: abandoned toilets, stunted development and
the costs of caste, Harper Collins, 2017.
Crosta, Tommaso, DeanKarlan, FinleyOng, JuliusRu¨schenp¨ohler, andChristopherR
Udry, “Unconditional Cash Transfers: A Bayesian Meta-Analysis of Randomized Evaluations
in Low and Middle Income Countries,” Working Paper 32779, National Bureau of Economic
Research August 2024.
Currie, JanetandTomVogl,“Early-lifehealthandadultcircumstanceindevelopingcountries,”
Annual Review of Economics, 2013, 5 (1), 1–36.
Davala, Sarath, Renana Jhabvala, Kapoor-Mehta Sowmya, and Guy Standing, Basic
Income: A Transformative Policy for India, Bloomsbury Academic, 2015.
25

Deaton, Angus, The analysis of household surveys: a microeconometric approach to development
policy, World Bank Publications, 1997.
and Jean Dr`eze, “Food and Nutrition in India: Facts and Interpretations,” Economic and
Political Weekly, 2009, 44 (7), 42–65.
Doyle, Orla, “The first 2,000 days and child skills,” Journal of Political Economy, 2020, 128 (6),
2067–2122.
Dr`eze, Jean, Reetika Khera, and Anmol Somanchi, “Maternity Entitlements in India:
Women’s Rights Derailed,” SocArXiv v5mc6. doi, 2021, 10.
Duflo, Esther, “Women Empowerment and Economic Development,” Journal of Economic Lit-
erature, December 2012, 50 (4), 1051–79.
Dunbar, Geoffrey R, Arthur Lewbel, and Krishna Pendakur, “Children’s resources in
collective households: identification, estimation, and an application to child poverty in Malawi,”
American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (1), 438–471.
Egger, Dennis, Johannes Haushofer, Edward Miguel, Paul Niehaus, and Michael
Walker, “General equilibrium effects of cash transfers: experimental evidence from Kenya,”
Econometrica, 2022, 90 (6), 2603–2643.
Esrey, Steven A, “Water, waste, and well-being: a multicountry study,” American Journal of
Epidemiology, 1996, 143 (6), 608–623.
Fernald, Lia CH, Paul J Gertler, and Lynnette M Neufeld, “Role of cash in conditional
cash transfer programmes for child health, growth, and development: an analysis of Mexico’s
Oportunidades,” The Lancet, 2008, 371 (9615), 828–837.
Fernald, Lisa and Melissa Hidrobo, “Effect of Ecuador’s cash transfer program (Bono de
Desarrollo Humano) on child development in infants and toddlers: a randomized effectiveness
trial,” Social Science & Medicine, 2011, 72 (9), 1437–46.
Field, Erica and Elisa M Maffioli, “Are behavioral change interventions needed to make cash
transfer programs work for children? Experimental evidence from Myanmar,” Economic Devel-
opment and Cultural Change, 2025, 73 (3), 1187–1220.
, Rohini Pande, Natalia Rigol, Simone Schaner, and Charity Troyer Moore, “On her
own account: How strengthening women’s financial control impacts labor supply and gender
norms,” American Economic Review, 2021, 111 (7), 2342–75.
Fink, Gu¨nther, Isabel Gu¨nther, and Kenneth Hill, “The effect of water and sanitation
on child health: evidence from the demographic and health surveys 1986–2007,” International
Journal of Epidemiology, 2011, 40 (5), 1196–1204.
Fraker, A, N Shah, and Ronald Abraham, “Quantitative assessment: beneficiary nutritional
status & performance of ICDS Supplementary Nutrition Programme in Bihar,” International
Growth Center, 2013.
Gadenne, Lucie and Monika Singhal, “The Form of Transfers: In-kind, Cash, or Vouchers?,”
in Rema Hanna and Ben Olken, eds., Handbook of Social Protection, MIT Press, forthcoming.
26

, Samuel Norris, Monica Singhal, and Sandip Sukhtankar, “In-Kind Transfers as Insur-
ance,” American Economic Review, September 2024, 114 (9), 2861–97.
Ganimian, Alejandro J., Karthik Muralidharan, and Christopher R. Walters, “Aug-
menting State Capacity for Child Development: Experimental Evidence from India,” Journal of
Political Economy, May 2024, 132 (5), 1565–1602.
Gennetian, Lisa A., Greg Duncan, Nathan A. Fox, Sarah Halpern-Meekin, Katherine
Magnuson, Kimberly G. Noble, and Hirokazu Yoshikawa, “Effectsofamonthlyuncondi-
tional cash transfer starting at birth on family investments among US families with low income,”
Nature Human Behavior, 2024, (8), 1514––1529.
Geruso, Michael and Dean Spears, “Neighborhoodsanitationandinfantmortality,” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2018, 10 (2), 125–62.
Gilligan, Daniel O and Shalini Roy, “Resources, stimulation, andcognition: Howtransfer pro-
grams and preschool shape cognitive development in Uganda,” Technical Report, International
Food Policy Research Institute 2013.
Glennerster, Rachel, Claire Walsh, and Lucia Diaz-Martin, “APracticalGuidetoMeasur-
ing Women’s and Girl’s Empowerment in Impact Evaluations,” Technical Report, Abdul Latif
Jameel Poverty Action Lab 2018.
Hammer, Jeffrey and Dean Spears, “Village sanitation and child health: effects and external
validity in a randomized field experiment in rural India,” Journal of Health Economics, 2016, 48,
135–148.
Ip, Patrick, Frederick Ka Wing Ho, Nirmala Rao, Jin Sun, Mary Eming Young,
Chun Bong Chow, Winnie Tso, and Kam Lun Hon,“Impactofnutritionalsupplementson
cognitive development of children in developing countries: A meta-analysis,” Scientific Reports,
2017, 7 (1), 10611.
Jayachandran, Seema and Alessandra Voena, “Women’s power in the household,” Journal
of Economic Literature, 2025.
and Ilyana Kuziemko, “Why do mothers breastfeed girls less than boys? Evidence and
implications for child health in India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (3), 1485–
1538.
and Rohini Pande, “Why are Indian children so short? The role of birth order and son
preference,” American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (9), 2600–2629.
Khera, Reetika, “Cash vs. in-kind transfers: Indian data meets theory,” Food Policy, 2014, 46,
116–128.
Klasen, Stephan, “Poverty, undernutrition, and child mortality: Some inter-regional puzzles and
their implications for research and policy,” The Journal of Economic Inequality, 2008, 6, 89–115.
Levere, Michael, GayatriAcharya, andPrashantBharadwaj,“TheRoleofInformationand
Cash Transfers on Early-Childhood Development: Short- and Long-Run Evidence from Nepal,”
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 2024, 72 (3), 1267–1293.
27

Lin, Audrie, Benjamin F Arnold, Sadia Afreen, Rie Goto, Tarique Mohammad Nu-
rul Huda, Rashidul Haque, Rubhana Raqib, Leanne Unicomb, Tahmeed Ahmed,
John M Colford Jr et al., “Household environmental conditions are associated with enteropa-
thy and impaired growth in rural Bangladesh,” American Journal of Tropical Medicine and
Hygiene, 2013, 89 (1), 130–137.
Longvah, T, R Ananthan, K Bhaskarachary, and Venkaiah K, “Indian Food Composition
Tables,” Technical Report, National Institute of Nutrition (Indian Council of Medical Research)
2017.
Macours, Karen, Norbert Schady, and Renos Vakis, “Cash transfers, behavioral changes,
and cognitive development in early childhood: evidence from a randomized experiment,” Amer-
ican Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2012, 4 (2), 247–73.
Malik, Faisal, “Take-home rations used to feed cattle,” Hindustan Times, July 2016.
Manley, James, Harold Alderman, and Ugo Gentilini, “Moreevidenceoncashtransfersand
child nutritional outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis,” BMJ Global Health, 2022, 7
(4), e008233.
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,“DietaryGuidelines: OperationalGuidelinesforState
Programme Managers to be Followed in Public Health Facilities,” September 2018. Accessed:
2025-07-23.
, “National Family Health Survey (NFHS-5) 2019-2021,” Technical Report 2022.
,“NationalFamilyHealthSurvey(NFHS-5)2019-2021: JharkhandFactSheet,”TechnicalReport
2022.
Muralidharan, Karthik, Accelerating India’s Development: A State-led Roadmap for Effective
Governance, Penguin Viking, 2024.
and Paul Niehaus, “Experimentation at scale,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2017, 31
(4), 103–124.
, Mauricio Romero, and Kaspar Wu¨thrich, “Factorial Designs, Model Selection, and (In-
correct) Inference in Randomized Experiments,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 03
2023, pp. 1–44.
Murphy, Kevin M, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny, “Industrialization and the big
push,” Journal of Political Economy, 1989, 97 (5), 1003–1026.
Narayanan, Sudha and Shree Saha,“Takehomerations(THR)andcashtransfersformaternal
and child nutrition: A synthesis of evidence in India,” Indira Gandhi Institute of Development
Research, Mumbai Working Papers, 2020, (2020-039).
Nasrin, Dilruba, Yuanyuan Liang, Helen Powell, Ines Gonzalez Casanova, Samba O
Sow, M Jahangir Hossain, Richard Omore, Doh Sanogo, Boubou Tamboura,
Syed MA Zaman et al., “Moderate-to-severe diarrhea and stunting among children younger
than 5 years: findings from the Vaccine Impact on Diarrhea in Africa (VIDA) study,” Clinical
Infectious Diseases, 2023, 76 (Supplement 1), S41–S48.
28

NationalInstituteofNutrition,“DietaryGuidelinesforIndians-AManual,”TechnicalReport,
National Institute of Nutrition (Indian Council of Medical Research) 2011.
Niehaus, Paul and Tavneet Suri, “Cash Transfers,” in Rema Hanna and Ben Olken, eds., The
Handbook of Social Protection: Evidence to Inform Policy in Low- and Middle-Income Countries,
MIT Press, forthcoming.
NITI Aayog, “Multi-dimensional Poverty Index,” NITI report, 2021.
Noble, Kimberly, Katherine Magnuson, Greg Duncan, Lisa A Gennetian, Hirokazu
Yoshikawa, Nathan A Fox, Sarah Halpern-Meekin, Sonya Troller-Renfree, Sangdo
Han, Shannon Egan-Dailey, Timothy D Nelson, Jennifer Mize Nelson, Sarah Black,
Michael Georgieff, and Debra Karhson, “The Effect of a Monthly Unconditional Cash
Transfer on Children’s Development at Four Years of Age: A Randomized Controlled Trial in
the U.S.,” Working Paper 33844, National Bureau of Economic Research May 2025.
Panagariya, Arvind, “Does India really suffer from worse child malnutrition than sub-Saharan
Africa?,” Economic and Political Weekly, 2013, pp. 98–111.
Patil, Sumeet R., Benjamin F. Arnold, Alicia L. Salvatore, Bertha Briceno, Sandipan
Ganguly, John M. Colford Jr, and Paul J. Gertler, “TheEffectofIndia’sTotalSanitation
Campaign on Defecation Behaviors and Child Health in Rural Madhya Pradesh: A Cluster
Randomized Controlled Trial,” PLOS Medicine, 2014, 11, 1–17.
Paxson, Christina and Norbert Schady, “Does money matter? The effects of cash transfers
on child development in rural Ecuador,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 2010, 59
(1), 187–229.
Petri, WilliamA,MarkMiller, HenryJBinder, MyronMLevine, RebeccaDillingham,
Richard L Guerrant et al., “Enteric infections, diarrhea, and their impact on function and
development,” Journal of Clinical Investigation, 2008, 118 (4), 1277–1290.
Pitt, Mark M, Mark R Rosenzweig, and Mohammad Nazmul Hassan, “Human capital
investment and the gender division of labor in a brawn-based economy,” American Economic
Review, 2012, 102 (7), 3531–3560.
Rah, Jee Hyun, Aidan A Cronin, Bhupendra Badgaiyan, Victor M Aguayo, Suzanne
Coates, and Sarah Ahmed, “Household sanitation and personal hygiene practices are associ-
ated with child stunting in rural India: a cross-sectional analysis of surveys,” BMJ open, 2015, 5
(2), e005180.
Ramalingaswami, Vulimiri, UrbanJonsson, andJonRohde,“TheAsianEnigma,”Progress
of Nations, 1996, pp. 10–17.
Roberts, Marina, TerezieTolar-Peterson, AbbyReynolds, CaitlinWall, NicoleReeder,
and Gina Rico Mendez, “Theeffectsofnutritionalinterventionsonthecognitivedevelopment
of preschool-age children: A systematic review,” Nutrients, 2022, 14 (3), 532.
Ruel, Marie T, “Operationalizing dietary diversity: a review of measurement issues and research
priorities,” The Journal of Nutrition, 2003, 133 (11), 3911S–3926S.
29

Schonhaut, Luisa, Iv´an Armijo, Marianne Sch¨onstedt, Jorge Alvarez, and Miguel
Cordero, “Validity of the ages and stages questionnaires in term and preterm infants,” Pe-
diatrics, 2013, 131 (5), e1468–e1474.
Sekher, TV, Manoj Alagarajan, and NITI Aayog, “Concurrent Monitoring and Process
Review of the Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana (PMMVY) in Assam, Bihar and Maha-
rashtra,” 2019.
Singh, Abhijeet, Albert Park, and Stefan Dercon, “School Meals as a Safety Net: An
Evaluation of the Midday Meal Scheme in India,” Economic Development and Cultural Change,
2014, 62 (2), 275–306.
Spears, Dean, “Exposure to open defecation can account for the Indian enigma of child height,”
Journal of Development Economics, 2020, 146, 102277.
, Diane Coffey, and Jere R Behrman,“EndogenousinclusionintheDemographicandHealth
Survey anthropometric sample: Implications for studying height within households,” Journal of
Development Economics, 2022, 155, 102783.
Subramanian, Shankar and Angus Deaton, “The demand for food and calories,” Journal of
Political Economy, 1996, 104 (1), 133–162.
Sukhtankar, Sandip,“DigitalTechnologyandSocialProtection: PromisesandPitfalls,”inRema
Hanna and Ben Olken, eds., Handbook of Social Protection, MIT Press, forthcoming.
The Economist, “Indian politicians are becoming obsessed with
doling out cash,” https://www.economist.com/asia/2025/01/23/
indian-politicians-are-becoming-obsessed-with-doling-out-cash January 2025.
Accessed: 2025-03-04.
Vidmar, Suzanna, Tim Cole, and Huiqi Pan, “Standardizing anthropometric measures in
children and adolescents with functions for egen: Update,” The Stata Journal, 2013, 13, 366–
378.
Weaver, Jeffrey, Sandip Sukhtankar, Paul Niehaus, and Karthik Muralidharan, “Jhark-
hand ICDS Pre-Analysis Plan Report,” https://doi.org/10.1257/rct.2899-5.0 2023.
WHO, “WHO Child Growth Standards: Length/height-for-age, weight-for-age, weight-for-length,
weight-for-height and body mass index-for-age,” Technical Report, World Health Organization
2006.
,“Indicatorsforassessinginfantandyoungchildfeedingpractices.Part1: Definitions,”Technical
Report, World Health Organization 2008.
World Bank, “High Economic Growth has not Translated into Superior Nutritional Status for
India,” Technical Report, The World Bank 2009.
, “Helping India Combat Persistently High Rates of Malnutrition,” Technical Report, The World
Bank 2013.
World Economic Forum, “Global Gender Gap Report 2025,” Technical Report 2025.
World Health Organization, “Levels and trends in child malnutrition: UNICEF,” 2023.
30

Zimmermann, Laura, “ReconsideringgenderbiasinintrahouseholdallocationinIndia,” Journal
of Development Studies, 2012, 48 (1), 151–163.
31

gnidnepS
dlohesuoH
:1
elbaT
gnidnepS
dooF-noN
gnidnepS
niS
gnidnepS
dooF
evisnetnI
evisnetxE
SHI
evisnetnI
evisnetxE
SHI
latoT
evisnetnI
evisnetxE
SHI
)01(
)9(
)8(
)7(
)6(
)5(
)4(
)3(
)2(
)1(
semoctuO
1
raeY
:A
lenaP
10.0−
10.0−
80.0−
∗11.302
∗∗∗11.0
500.0
∗∗∗51.0
tnemtaerT
)70.0(
)20.0(
)41.0(
)78.111(
)40.0(
)400.0(
)50.0(
58.5
36.0
1.4
76.0323
57.7
99.0
33.8
naeM
lortnoC
964,1
733,2
733,2
433,2
063,2
063,2
snoitavresbO
semoctuO
2
raeY
:B
lenaP
40.0
20.0
∗91.0
01.0−
30.0
11.0
69.702
∗∗90.0
∗∗10.0
∗∗∗12.0
tnemtaerT
)60.0(
)10.0(
)11.0(
)41.0(
)40.0(
)92.0(
)30.931(
)40.0(
)10.0(
)70.0(
76.8
69.0
20.9
49.5
36.0
61.4
78.9883
99.7
79.0
14.8
naeM
lortnoC
633,1
773,1
773,1
963
285
285
968,1
428,1
968,1
968,1
snoitavresbO
nigram
evisnetxE
.enis
cilobrepyh
esrevni
aiv
demrofsnart
elbairav
emoctuo
na
ot
niatrep
stluser
SHI
.dlohesuoh
eht
si sisylana
fo tinu
ehT
eht
nrecnoc
stluser
nigram
evisnetnI
.htnom
suoiverp
eht
ni
gnidneps
detaicossa
eht
fo
yna
dedrocer
sdlohesuoh
rehtehw
nrecnoc
stluser
2
raeY
ni
semoctuO
.gol
larutan
aiv
demrofsnart
elbairav
emoctuo
na
ot
niatrep
dna
,evitisop
si
erutidnepxe
mohw
rof
sdlohesuoh
fo
tesbus
eht
fo
lla
dna
syevrus
dlefi
enibmoc
)4(
ot
)1(
snmuloc
,B
lenap
nI
.snoitavresbo
enohp
dna
dlefi
fo
elpmas
deloop
a
ot
dnopserroc
)B
lenap(
snmuloc
dna
,enohp
eht
revo
detcelloc
ton
saw
gnidneps
doog
nis
ecnis
atad
yevrus
dlefi
ylno
esu
)7(
ot
)5(
snmuloc
,syevrus
enohp
2
raey
fo
dnuor
tsrfi
eht
ni
detcelloc
ton
saw
noitamrofni
siht
sa
syevrus
enohp
fo
dnuor
dnoces
dna
yevrus
dlefi
eht
morf
atad
loop
)01(
ot
)8(
eht
htiw
laed
ot
stceffe
dexfi
ezis
dlohesuoh
sedulcni
dna
elitnecrep
ht99
eht
ta
gnidneps
doof
latot
sezirosniw
)4(
nmuloC
.syevrus
enohp
ta
deretsulc
dna
sesehtnerap
ni
era
srorre
dradnatS
.ezis
ylimaf
ni
secnereffid
ot
eud
si
hcihw
fo
hcum
,emoctuo
eht
ni
noisrepsid
tnacfiingis
.10.
<
p∗∗∗,50.
<
p∗∗,01.
<
p∗
.level-CWA
eht
32

ekatnI
dooF
fo
ytilauQ
&
ytitnauQ
:2
elbaT
rehtoM
dlihC
seirolaC
tneirtuN
yrateiD
muminiM
yrateiD
dlohesuoH
dlohesuoH
rehtoM
dlihC
xedni
erocs
ytisrevid
ycneuqerf
laem
erocs
ytisrevid
)qe
tluda(
)8(
)7(
)6(
)5(
)4(
)3(
)2(
)1( semoctuO
1
raeY
:A
lenaP
∗∗∗90.0
∗∗∗80.0
30.0
∗∗∗61.0
∗∗∗90.131
∗∗∗43.131
∗∗∗36.041
∗∗∗08.93
tnemtaerT
)20.0(
)20.0(
)20.0(
)50.0(
)94.54(
)83.24(
)98.13(
)27.31(
91.0
87.2
16.0
95.1
78.1002
93.8761
99.6561
55.612
naeM
lortnoC
943,2
943,2
443,2
943,2
123,2
123,2
063,2
063,2
snoitavresbO
semoctuO
2
raeY
:B
lenaP
∗∗∗71.0
∗∗∗22.0
10.0
∗∗∗42.0
00.36
65.59
∗∗∗23.172
∗∗22.121
tnemtaerT
)40.0(
)50.0(
)20.0(
)60.0(
)96.401(
)44.97(
)20.26(
)98.05(
22.0
53.3
19.0
4.3
26.9291
68.9941
4.6461
16.588
naeM
lortnoC
695
124,1
069
124,1
465
465
695
695
snoitavresbO
yrateid
gniwollof
eht
fo
rebmun
eht
sa
denfied
si
)7-0(
erocs
ytisrevid
yrateiD
.elbat
eht
fo
wor
tsrfi
eht
ni
detacidni
si
sisylana
fo tinU
)5(
,sdoof
hsefl
)4(
,stcudorp
yriad
)3(
,stun
dna
semugel
)2(
,srebut
dna
,stoor
,sniarg
)1(
:tnednopser
eht
yb
demusnoc
erew
taht
spuorg
eht
fo
tnecrep
eht
gnitamitse
yb
detupmoc
si
xedni
tneirtuN
.selbategev
dna
stiurf
rehto
)7(
,selbategev
dna
stiurf
hcir
A-nimativ
)6(
,sgge
demusnoc
etalof
yrateid
dna
,nixodiryp
,nicain
,nivaflobir
,enimaiht
,nori
,muiclac
,taf
elbisiv
,nietorp
,seirolac
fo
eulav
yliad
dednemmocer
hcihw
,yevrus
enohp
aiv
detcelloc
eb
ton
dluoc
semoctuo
emos
esuaceb
semoctuo
2
raey
ssorca
reffid
stnuoc
noitavresbO
.gnigareva
dna
yevrus
dlefi
esu
)6(
dna
,)2(
,)1(
snmuloC
,B
lenap
ni
semoctuo
2
raey
eht
roF
.91-DIVOC
fo
tesno
eht
retfa
ot
denoitisnart
krow
dlefi
atad
loop
)5(
dna
,)4(
,)3(
snmuloC
.serusaem
eseht
etaerc
ot
stneidergni
laudividni
fo
ytitnauq
eht
erusaem
ot
yrassecen
si
ti
sa
,atad
yevrus
eht
dna
tseretni
fo
semoctuo
eht
fo
hcae
fo
noitazilausiv
a
rof
5.A
elbat
ees(
syevrus
enohp
fo
sdnuor
elpitlum
dna
dlefi
eht
morf
rof
esoht
.e.i
—
shtnom
32
rednu
era
ohw
nerdlihc
delpmas
eht
fo
tesbus
eht
ot
sniatrep
)4(
nmuloC
.)detcelloc
erew
yeht
hcihw
ni
dnuor
eht
ta
deretsulc
era
dna
sesehtnerap
ni
era
srorre
dradnatS
.erusaem
lufgninaem
yllacinilc
a
deredisnoc
si
ycneuqerf
laem
muminim
mohw
.10.<p∗∗∗,50.<p∗∗,01.<p∗
.level-CWA
33

semoctuO
lanoitiddA
:3
elbaT
dlihC
rehtoM
sessenlli
latoT
fo
ytilibaborP
idawnagnA
lanoitirtuN
noisserpeD
tnemrewopmE
tsap
eht
ni
lamrof
gnitisiv
secivres
egdelwonk
xedni
xedni
shtnom
eerht
redivorp
lacidem
deviecer
xedni
)6(
)5(
)4(
)3(
)2(
)1(
semoctuO
1
raeY
:A
lenaP
∗30.0
∗∗∗62.0
80.0−
∗∗∗31.0
∗∗71.0
tnemtaerT
)20.0(
)90.0(
)70.0(
)50.0(
)70.0(
77.0
80.5
85.2
13.2
24.3
naeM
lortnoC
242,2
003,2
743,2
943,2
943,2
snoitavresbO
semoctuO
2
raeY
:B
lenaP
20.0
∗∗∗01.0
70.0
42.0−
60.0
∗∗∗92.0
tnemtaerT
)50.0(
)30.0(
)12.0(
)61.0(
)70.0(
)11.0(
88.1
5.0
33.4
91.3
95.2
46.3
naeM
lortnoC
172,1
172,1
685
695
940,1
695
snoitavresbO
-0(
tnemrewopme
,)6-0(
egdelwonk
lanoitirtun
ehT
.elbat
eht
fo
wor
tsrfi
eht
ni
detacidni
si
sisylana
fo
tinu
ehT
tseggus
taht
tnednopser
eht
yb
derewsna
snoitseuq
fo rebmun
eht
ot
dnopserroc
secidni
)5-0(
noisserped
dna
,)5
fo
rebmun
eht
ot
sdnopserroc
deviecer
secivres
idawnagnA
.citsiretcarahc
gnidnopserroc
eht
fo
eerged
hgih
a
noitavresbO
.01.A
elbaT
ees
,ecivres
CWA
hcae
no
stluser
roF
.deviecer
tnednopser
eht
taht
)9-0(
secivres
CWA
dlefi
hcihw
,yevrus
enohp
aiv
detcelloc
eb ton
dluoc
semoctuo
emos
esuaceb
semoctuo
2Y
ssorca
reffid
stnuoc
syevrus
enohp
fo
dnuor
eno
gnirud
detcelloc
ylno
erew
srehtO
.91-DIVOC
fo
tesno
eht
retfa
ot
denoitisnart
krow
nmuloc(
egdelwonk
lanoitirtuN
.eugitaf
tnednopser
ecuder
ot
trohs
tpek
eb
ot
dah
tnemurtsni
enohp
eht
ecnis
eht
;yevrus
dlefi
eht
ni
detcelloc
erew
)4
nmuloc(
xedni
noisserped
eht
dna
,)2
nmuloc(
secivres
idawnagna
,)1
dna
;noitcelloc
atad
enohp
fo
dnuor
dnoces
dna
yevrus
dlefi
eht
ni
detcelloc
saw
)3
nmuloc(
xedni
tnemrewopme
noitcellocatadenohpfodnuortsrfidnayevrusdlefiehtnidetcellocsaw)6dna5snmuloc(noitamrofnissenllidlihc erew
yeht
hcihw
ni dnuor
yevrus
eht
dna
tseretni
fo semoctuo
eht
fo
hcae
fo
noitazilausiv
a
rof
5.A
elbat
ees(
.10.
<
p∗∗∗,50.
< p∗∗,01.
<
p∗
.level-CWA
eht
ta
deretsulc
dna
sesehtnerap
ni
era
srorre
dradnatS
.)detcelloc
34

Table 4: Anthropometric Outcomes
Child
HAZ Stunted WAZ Underweight development
index
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Panel A: Year 1 Outcomes
Treatment 0.005 −0.002 0.002 −0.04∗∗
(0.05) (0.02) (0.04) (0.02)
Control Mean -1.47 0.31 -1.67 0.4
Observations 2,355 2,355 2,355 2,355
Panel B: Year 3 Outcomes
Treatment 0.01 0.01 0.02 -0.02 0.12∗∗∗
(0.04) (0.02) (0.04) (0.02) (0.04)
Control Mean -1.84 0.45 -1.78 0.41 -0.06
Observations 2,115 2,115 2,155 2,155 2,164
The unit of analysis is the child. HAZ and WAZ denote the child’s height-
for-age and weight-for-age z-scores, respectively. Children with WAZ and
HAZ of less than -2 are classified as moderately stunted and underweight
respectively. StandarderrorsareinparenthesesandclusteredattheAWC-
level. ∗p < .10,∗∗p < .05,∗∗∗p < .01.
35

Table 5: Interactions with Neighborhood Sanitation Environment
Child
HAZ Stunted WAZ Underweight development
index
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Panel A: Implied Effects by Percentile
10% 0.07 0 0.12∗ −0.02 2.55
25% 0.06 0 0.1∗ −0.02 2.73∗
50% 0.02 0.01 0.03 −0.02 3.39∗∗∗
75% −0.02 0.02 −0.03 −0.01 3.97∗∗∗
90% −0.05 0.02 −0.09 −0.01 4.47∗∗
Test of Equality: p-value 0.33 0.69 0.06 0.88 0.52
Joint p-value 0.2
Panel B: Underlying Parameter Estimates
Treatment 0.08 0.0002 0.13∗ −0.02 2.26
(0.08) (0.04) (0.07) (0.03) (1.92)
Poor Sanitation Index −0.45∗∗∗ 0.19∗∗∗ −0.26∗∗ 0.12∗ −26.60∗∗∗
(0.13) (0.07) (0.13) (0.06) (3.40)
Treatment × −0.18 0.03 −0.30∗∗ 0.01 2.91
Poor Sanitation Index (0.18) (0.09) (0.15) (0.08) (4.37)
Control Mean −1.84 0.45 −1.78 0.41 85.9
Observations 2115 2115 2155 2155 2164
Theunitofanalysisisthechild. OutcomesarefromYear3. HAZandWAZdenotethechild’sheight-
for-age and weight-for-age z-score. Children with HAZ and WAZ scores of less than -2 are classified
as stunted and underweight, respectively. As a summary measure of sanitation environment, we
constructed a principal components index from 5 variables such as whether the household or their
neighbors use a toilet. The poor sanitation index used in this regression is equal to the household’s
percentile rank on that principal components index, where a value of zero is equal to the best
sanitation environment (lowest incidence of open defecation) and one is the worst. Standard errors
are in parentheses and clustered at the AWC-level. ∗p < .10,∗∗p < .05,∗∗∗p < .01.
36

Table 6: Sibling Anthropometrics
HAZ Stunted WAZ Underweight
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Panel A: Year 2 Outcomes
Treatment 0.13 −0.10∗∗
(0.10) (0.04)
Control Mean −1.45 0.32
Observations 440 440
Panel B: Year 3 Outcomes
Treatment 0.07 −0.01 0.11∗∗ −0.002
(0.06) (0.02) (0.05) (0.02)
Control Mean −0.9 0.17 −1.49 0.29
Observations 2,046 2,046 2,138 2,138
The unit of analysis is the child. HAZ and WAZ denote the
sibling’s height-for-age and weight-for-age z-scores, respectively.
Children with HAZ and WAZ of less than -2 are classified as
moderately stunted and underweight respectively. Standard er-
rors are in parentheses and clustered at the AWC-level. ∗p <
.10,∗∗p < .05,∗∗∗p < .01.
37

Figure 1: Distribution of Fraction of Households Practicing Open Defecation in the DHS
Myanmar Mexico
1.5 (0.14) (0.21)
Nigeria
(0.16)
Jharkhand Jharkhand
(25th: 0.19) (50th: 0.35)
Jharkhand
(75th: 0.57)
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Fraction of Households Practicing Open Defecation
ytisneD
This figure presents the distribution of the fraction of households per community in rural Jhark-
hand practicing open defecation per the Demographic and Health Surveys-VII (2019-2021) pro-
gram. Vertical gray lines correspond to the quantiles of the DHS community-wise fraction of
households practicing open defecation in Jharkhand. The other vertical lines correspond to the
mean community-wise fraction of households practicing open defecation in other countries in which
studiesofconditionalcashtransfershavetakenplace: Mexico(Fernaldetal.,2008)(use1987DHS),
Myanmar (Field and Maffioli, 2025) (use DHS 2015-2016), and Nigeria (Carneiro et al., 2021) (use
DHS 2018). In each case, DHS data is sub-setted to best approximate the samples used and year of
the respective studies. For example, Fernald et al. (2008) uses data from 1998 in Mexico, so we use
the most temporally proximate DHS wave (19873),8which may overstate the rate of open defecation
in 1998 (and certainly in the present).
.

A Appendix: Additional Exhibits
Table A.1: Bank Account Usage
Purpose of withdrawal
Withdrew in Daily Medical Non-food Loan
House
last 30 days expenses expenses consumption payments
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Treatment 0.14∗∗∗ 0.10∗∗∗ 0.09∗∗ −0.04 −0.07∗∗ −0.04∗∗∗
(0.03) (0.04) (0.04) (0.03) (0.03) (0.01)
Control Mean 0.2 0.47 0.43 0.21 0.12 0.07
Observations 830 822 822 822 822 822
The unit of analysis is the respondent. Purpose of withdrawal refers to whether their most recent
withdrawal was used for the corresponding class of expenditure. ”Daily expenses” most commonly
refers to food or other small purchases for the household. Non-food consumption refers to non-
food items that could be considered consumption rather than investment (e.g., clothes). House
refers to spending on their house. The point estimates for withdrawals for loan repayment and
home improvements are negative. However, when considering the magnitude of the rise in overall
withdrawal activity (column 1), the magnitude of these negative coefficients is most consistent with
an unchanged absolute number of withdrawals for those purposes (but a reduced relative frequency).
Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the AWC level. ∗p < .10,∗∗p < .05,∗∗∗p < .01.
39

Table A.2: Balance Tests
Control Treatment p-value
Outcome (1) (2) (3)
Time Invariant Household Characteristics
Respondent’s Education (Years) 7.05 7.19 0.15
Scheduled Caste or Tribe 0.59 0.59 0.95
Birth Order 2.19 2.13 0.1
AWC-level Characteristics
Complete Registrations 7.66 7.48 0.61
Village-level Characteristics (2011 Census)
% Households Living in Poor Condition Houses 0.62 0.64 0.57
% Households with a Toilet 0.08 0.08 0.56
Area of Village (Hectares) 478.33 403.77 0.3
Distance from All-Weather Road (km) 0.58 0.48 0.19
Distance from Nearest Bank (km) 1.90 2.04 0.35
Distance from Regular Market / Mandi (km) 1.88 1.88 0.81
% Scheduled Caste or Tribe (2011) 0.42 0.39 0.18
Village Population 1938.75 1863.12 0.56
Number of AWCs 240 240
Joint F-test 0.8
Thistablepresentsbalancetestsforkeyoutcomesacrossthetreatmentandcontrol
group. Columns1-2presentmeansforeachoutcomebytreatmentgroup. Column
3 shows p-values for balance tests of each outcome across treatment groups. The
final row corresponds to a joint F-test conducted using a seemingly unrelated
regression framework. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the
AWC-level. ∗p < .10,∗∗p < .05,∗∗∗p < .01.
40

Table A.3: Survey Completion
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3
Endline Endline Phone Endline Insanitation
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Treatment 0.00 −0.01 −0.00 0.01 −0.00
(0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.02) (0.01)
Control Mean 0.78 0.20 0.62 0.72 0.37
Observations 2956 2956 2956 2956 2166
Columns (1) to (4) of this table presents estimates for the relation-
shipbetweentreatmentandprobabilityofsurveycompletionacross
each of this study’s survey waves. Column (5) regresses our sanita-
tion index on the treatment indicator to see whether sanitation is
related to treatment status. Regressions include sector and AWC
fixed effects. ∗p < .10,∗∗p < .05,∗∗∗p < .01
41

Table A.4: Likelihood of Year 2 Phone Contact by Year 1 Characteristics
Reached Over Phone
Respondent Education (Years) 0.004
(0.003)
Scheduled Caste or Tribe −0.04
(0.03)
Birth Order 0.01
(0.01)
Completed Registration 0.001
(0.004)
Husband Education (Years) 0.01∗∗∗
(0.004)
Rural −0.05
(0.08)
Hindu −0.004
(0.05)
Christian 0.16
(0.10)
Aadivaasi −0.03
(0.06)
Child Female 0.05∗∗
(0.02)
Age at First Transfer (Months) 0.01
(0.01)
Below the Poverty Line −0.05
(0.03)
Household Size 0.01
(0.004)
Bank Distance (Kilometers) −0.002
(0.001)
Uses Toilet 0.05∗
(0.03)
Observations 1,550
This table examines how likelihood of completing a
phone survey during year 2 is related to respondent
characteristics (as measured during earlier surveys).
Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at
the AWC-level. This sample only includes households
with whom we did not conduct a year 2 field survey.
∗p<.10,∗∗p<.05,∗∗∗p<.01.
42

selbairaV
emoctuO
yramirP
fo
tnemerusaeM
dna
gnimiT
:5.A
elbaT
3
raeY
2
raeY
1
raeY
2
&
1
esahP
2
esahP
1
esahP
2
esahP
1
esahP
dleiF
enohP
enohP
dleiF
dleiF
dleiF
12’
voN
02’
voN
02’
peS
02’
yaM
02’
beF
91’
voN
91’
naJ
noitingoC
&
scirtemoporhtnA
✓
✓
✓
✓
)ZAW(
egA-rof-thgieW
✓
✓
✓
✓
)ZAH(
egA-rof-thgieH
✓
✓
)ZAH(
egA-rof-thgieW
gnilbiS
✓
)ZAH(
egA-rof-thgieH
gnilbiS
✓
✓
✓
sllikS
rotoM
&
evitingoC
serutidnepxE
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
gnidnepS
dooF
✓
✓
✓
gnidnepS
niS
✓
✓
✓
gnidnepS
dooF-noN
noitirtuN
✓
✓
✓
noitpmusnoC
cirolaC
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
ytisreviD
yrateiD
s’dlihC
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
ytisreviD
yrateiD
s’rehtoM
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
ycneuqerF
laeM
muminiM
s’dlihC
✓
✓
✓
xednI
tneirtuN
s’rehtoM
laroivaheB
&
laicoS
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
redivorP
lacideM
lamroF
fo
noitatisiV
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
shtnoM
eerhT
tsaP
ni
sessenllI
✓
✓
✓
✓
secivreS
idawnagnA
✓
✓
✓
egdelwonK
lanoitirtuN
s’rehtoM
✓
✓
✓
✓
xednI
tnemrewopmE
✓
✓
✓
xednI
noisserpeD
delebal(
8102
hcraM
ni
stcirtsid
evfi
ni
nageb
tnemtaert
eht
erehw
,sesahp
owt
ni
tuo
dellor
saw
tcejorp
ehT
ta
ecalp
koot
noitcelloc
atad
,tluser
a sA
.)”2
esahP”(
8102
rebmevoN
ni
stcirtsid
eerht
rehtona
ni dna
)”1
esahP”
foyraunaJni1raeyfodneehttayevrusnosrep-ninasawereht,stcirtsid1esahproF
.esahphcaenisemittnereffid
raey
ehT
.)3
nmuloc(
0202
fo
yraurbeF
ni
gninnigeb
2
raey
fo
dne
eht
ta
yevrus
nosrep-ni
na dna
)1
nmuloc(
9102
0202
fo
yaM
ni
enohp
eht
revo
detelpmoc
saw
noitcelloc
atad
dna
91-DIVOC
ot
eud
yawdim
detlah
saw
yevrus
2
nmuloc(
9102
fo
rebmevoN
ni
1
raey
fo
dne
eht
ta
yevrus
nosrep-ni
na
saw
ereht
,stcirtsid
2 esahp
roF
.)4
nmuloc(
,eugitaftnednopserecuderoT
.enohpehtrevodetcudnocerew2esahpnisyevrus2raeyeht
,91-DIVOCoteuD
.)2
nmuloc(
0202
fo
rebmevoN
ni
eno
dna
)5
nmuloc(
0202
fo
rebmetpeS
ni
eno
:syevrus
enohp
owt
otni
tilps
saw
siht
1202
fo
rebmevoN
ni
detcudnoc
saw
yevrus
nosrep-ni
lanfi
a
,stcirtsid
2
esahp
dna
1 esahp
htob
ni ,yllaniF
.)6
.)7
nmuloc(
43

)elpmaS
2
raeY
ot
detcirtseR(
1
raeY
ni
ekatnI
dooF
fo
ytilauQ
&
ytitnauQ
:6.A
elbaT
rehtoM
dlihC
seirolaC
tneirtuN
yrateiD
muminiM
yrateiD
dlohesuoH
dlohesuoH
rehtoM
dlihC
xedni
erocs
ytisrevid
ycneuqerf
laem
erocs
ytisrevid
)qe
tluda(
)8(
)7(
)6(
)5(
)4(
)3(
)2(
)1(
2
raeY
ni
devresbO
elpmaS
:A
lenaP
∗80.0
∗∗31.0
10.0
01.0
49.66
72.501
∗∗∗17.381
45.03
tnemtaerT
)50.0(
)50.0(
)40.0(
)01.0(
)29.99(
)26.69(
)73.26(
)40.23(
51.0
56.2
75.0
81.1
3.9112
75.0771
66.6161
18.861
naeM
lortnoC
175
175
865
175
065
065
475
475
snoitavresbO
elpmaS
lluF
:B
lenaP
∗∗∗90.0
∗∗∗80.0
30.0
∗∗∗61.0
∗∗∗90.131
∗∗∗43.131
∗∗∗36.041
∗∗∗08.93
tnemtaerT
)20.0(
)20.0(
)20.0(
)50.0(
)94.54(
)83.24(
)98.13(
)27.31(
91.0
87.2
16.0
95.1
78.1002
93.8761
99.6561
55.612
naeM
lortnoC
943,2
943,2
443,2
943,2
123,2
123,2
063,2
063,2
snoitavresbO
ni
detcelloc
erew
semoctuo
noitirtun
mohw
rof
elpmas
eht
fo
tesbus
eht
rehtehw
tset
ot
1
raeY
ni
semoctuo
noitirtun
sesylana
elbat
sihT
saerehw
,2
raeY
ni
devresbo
erew
semoctuo
noitirtun
hcihw
rof
sdlohesuoh
si
A
lenaP
ni
elpmas
ehT
.elpmas
lluf
eht
ot
ralimis
si
2
raeY
ytisrevid
yrateiD
.elbat
eht
fo
wor
tsrfi
eht
ni
detacidni
si
sisylana
fo
tinU
.1
raeY
ni
devresbo
sdlohesuoh
fo
tes
lluf
eht
sniatnoc
B
lenaP
,srebut
dna
,stoor
,sniarg
)1(
:tnednopser
eht
yb
demusnoc
erew
taht
spuorg
yrateid
gniwollof
eht
fo
rebmun
eht
sa denfied
si
)7-0(
erocs
.selbategev
dna
stiurf
rehto
)7(
,selbategev
dna
stiurf
hcir
A-nimativ
)6(
,sgge
)5(
,sdoof
hsefl
)4(
,stcudorp
yriad
)3(
,stun
dna
semugel
)2(
,enimaiht,nori,muiclac,tafelbisiv,nietorp,seirolacfoeulavyliaddednemmocerehtfotnecrepehtgnitamitseybdetupmocsixednitneirtuN -CWA
eht
ta
deretsulc
era
dna
sesehtnerap
ni
era
srorre
dradnatS
.gnigareva
dna
demusnoc
etalof
yrateid
dna
,nixodiryp
,nicain
,nivaflobir
.10.<p∗∗∗,50.<p∗∗,01.<p∗
.level
44

Table A.7: Nutrients Index Components (Macro-Nutrients)
Iron Protein Visible Fat Calcium
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Panel A: Year 1 Outcomes
Treatment 0.05∗∗∗ 0.04∗∗∗ 0.02∗∗∗ 0.004
(0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01)
Control Mean 0.41 0.67 0.17 0.18
Observations 2,360 2,360 2,360 2,360
Panel B: Year 2 Outcomes
Treatment 0.07∗∗∗ 0.07∗∗∗ 0.04∗∗∗ 0.003
(0.02) (0.02) (0.01) (0.02)
Control Mean 0.38 0.68 0.17 0.24
Observations 603 603 603 603
This table reports the effect of the treatment on individual macro-
nutrients. The unit of analysis is the mother. Outcome variables
correspond to the percent of daily value consumed for each macro-
nutrient used in the construction of the nutrients index (see Table 2).
Observations in Year 2 correspond to only the subset of respondents
who were sampled in the field. Standard errors are in parentheses
and clustered at the AWC-level. ∗p < .10,∗∗p < .05,∗∗∗p < .01.
45

3
raeY
ni
ekatnI
dooF
fo
ytilauQ
&
ytitnauQ
:8.A
elbaT
yrateiD
laD
ggE
tiurF
kliM
eciR
itoR
ytisrevid
)ytitnauq(
)ytitnauq(
)yna(
)yna(
)ytitnauq(
)ytitnauq(
)7(
)6(
)5(
)4(
)3(
)2(
)1(
dlihc
niaM
:A
lenaP
∗∗∗61.0
60.0
10.0
∗∗∗80.0
10.0−
40.0
∗∗∗22.0
tnemtaerT
)40.0(
)50.0(
)10.0(
)20.0(
)20.0(
)60.0(
)60.0(
25.3
32.1
1.0
44.0
44.0
44.2
43.1
naeM
lortnoC
661,2
661,2
661,2
261,2
661,2
661,2
661,2
snoitavresbO
gnilbiS
:B
lenaP
∗∗∗90.0
10.0
300.0
∗∗∗33.0
tnemtaerT
)20.0(
)20.0(
)11.0(
)90.0(
4.0
43.0
85.3
88.1
naeM
lortnoC
834,1
344,1
344,1
344,1
snoitavresbO
rebmun
eht
sa
denfied
si
)7-0(
erocs
ytisrevid
yrateiD
.3
raeY
ni
semoctuo
noitirtun
sesylana
elbat
sihT
)2(
,srebut
dna
,stoor
,sniarg
)1(
:tnednopser
eht
yb
demusnoc
erew
taht
spuorg
yrateid
gniwollof
eht
fo
,selbategev
dna
stiurf
hcir
A-nimativ
)6(
,sgge
)5(
,sdoof
hsefl
)4(
,stcudorp
yriad
)3(
,stun
dna
semugel
.level-CWA
eht
ta
deretsulc
era
dna
sesehtnerap
ni
era
srorre
dradnatS
.selbategev
dna
stiurf
rehto
)7(
.10.<p∗∗∗,50.<p∗∗,01.<p∗
46

Table A.9: Heterogeneity by Reporting of Mobile Phone Number Conditional on Assets
Nutritional Dietary Dietary
Nutrient
knowledge diversity diversity
index
index (child) (mother)
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Panel A: Year 1 Outcomes
Treatment 0.19∗∗∗ 0.22∗∗∗ 0.09∗∗∗ 0.11∗∗∗
(0.07) (0.05) (0.03) (0.03)
Treatment × Mobile Number | Assets −0.13 0.20∗ −0.05 0.04
(0.13) (0.12) (0.05) (0.06)
Control Mean 3.42 1.59 2.78 0.19
Observations 2,158 2,158 2,158 2,158
Panel B: Year 2 Outcomes
Treatment 0.33∗∗∗ 0.27∗∗∗ 0.24∗∗∗ 0.18∗∗∗
(0.12) (0.06) (0.05) (0.05)
Treatment × Mobile Number | Assets −0.21 0.14 0.04 0.01
(0.26) (0.12) (0.10) (0.11)
Control Mean 3.57 3.4 3.35 0.22
Observations 559 1,327 1,327 553
This table investigates whether the treatment has heterogeneous effects based on whether the
mother registers a mobile phone number, meaning that that she is able to receive IVR calls with
messaging on nutrition. The unit of analysis is the child or mother, and is indicated in the first row
of the table. Mobile number refers to whether the respondent reported a mobile phone number in
initial surveys. The interaction variable corresponds to residuals from a regression of mobile phone
on an asset index. Regressions estimated are fully saturated, with dummy the interaction variable
excluded for brevity. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the AWC-level. In panel
B, columns (1) and (4) use only field survey data, while columns (2) and (3) combine field and
phone survey data. ∗p < .10,∗∗p < .05,∗∗∗p < .01.
47

secivreS
CWA
fo
pU-ekaT
:01.A
elbaT
YVMMP
tnemnrevoG
emoh-ekaT
muiclac/norI
noitirtuN
htworG
dekooctoH
YVMMP
noitaniccaV
gnimroweD
loohcserP
tnuoma
semehcs
snoitar
stelbat
noitamrofni
tnemerusaem
slaem
)11(
)01(
)9(
)8(
)7(
)6(
)5(
)4(
)3(
)2(
)1( semoctuO1raeY:AlenaP
∗∗∗11.862
∗∗40.0
∗∗∗60.0
100.0
200.0−
∗40.0
∗∗∗90.0
20.0
∗∗∗60.0
300.0−
10.0−
tnemtaerT
)69.27(
)20.0(
)20.0(
)10.0(
)10.0(
)20.0(
)20.0(
)20.0(
)20.0(
)20.0(
)20.0(
94.853
21.0
26.0
88.0
37.0
95.0
5.0
7.0
24.0
33.0
3.0
naeMlortnoC
604,1
604,1
323,2
033,2
923,2
723,2
623,2
923,2
523,2
023,2
923,2
snoitavresbO
semoctuO2raeY:BlenaP
400.0−
30.0
30.0−
5000.0−
∗∗∗90.0
∗∗70.0
300.0−
30.0
30.0
tnemtaerT
)30.0(
)20.0(
)30.0(
)30.0(
)30.0(
)30.0(
)30.0(
)40.0(
)40.0(
3.0
58.0
62.0
63.0
13.0
75.0
75.0
44.0
73.0
naeMlortnoC
1
1
660,1
660,1
660,1
660,1
660,1
660,1
660,1
685
685
snoitavresbO
.noitacidemgnimrowedeviecerotdlihcrehkootrehtomehtrehtehwotsrefer”gnimroweD“
.raeyhcaesecivresCWAsuoiravpuekattahtstnednopserfonoitroporpehtrofsetamitsestneserpelbatsihT
.CWAehttaderusaemthgiewdnathgiehriehtdahdlihcehtrehtehwotsrefer”tnemerusaeM“
.smargorprosecivrestnemnrevogrehtorofpungisotCWAs’enognitisivotsrefer”semehcstnemnrevoG“
.noitatcal
dna
ycnangerp
gnirud
owt
rettal
eht
,secivres
ro
smeti
eseht
deviecer
)dlihc
reh
dna(
rehtom
eht rehtehw
ot
refer
”noitamrofni
noitirtun“
dna
,”stelbat
muiclac/nori“
”,slaem
dekooc
toH“
”noitaniccav“,yllaniF.CWArehmorfesehtdeviecerrehtomehtrehtehwotsrefer”snoitaremoh-ekaT“.CWAehtybderetsinimdasecivresloohcs-erpdeviecerdlihcehtrehtehwotsrefer”loohcserP“ 2
raey
eht
gnirud
slaem
dekooc
toh
ro
sloohcs-erp
tuoba
ksa
ton
did
ew
,B
lenap
nI
.ycnangerp
gnirud
flesreh
ro
dlihc
reh
rof
snoitazinummi
eviecer
ot
CWA
eht
detisiv
dlihc
eht
rehtehw
ot
srefer
rednusrefsnartfotpiecernoataD
.snmulocowttsrfiehtrofrewolerastnuocnoitavresboeht,tluserasA
.cimednap91-DIVOCehtoteudemittahttamehtreffotondidsCWAecnisyevrusenohp
forebmuneht,tluserasA
.emehcsehtfogninoitcnuftnerrucehtgnidnatsrednunidetseretnisrekamycilopfotseuqerehttayevrus1raeyehtfo1esahpgniruddetcellocylnosawemehcsYVMMPeht
.10.<p∗∗∗,50.<p∗∗,01.<p∗
.)11(dna)01(snmulocnirewolsisnoitavresbo
48