NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ZERO-SUM ENVIRONMENTS, THE EVOLUTION OF
EFFORT-SUPPRESSING BELIEFS, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Augustin Bergeron
Jean-Paul Carvalho
Joseph Henrich
Nathan Nunn
Jonathan L. Weigel
Working Paper 31663
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31663
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2023, Revised August 2025
We thank the editor, Elias Papaioannou, and anonymous referees for comments that have
substantially improved the paper. We also thank Toke Aidt, Ingela Alger, Maiguel Ballester,
Roland Benabou, Chris Bidner, Paola Conconi, Meredith Crowley, Gregory Dow, Martin Fiszbein,
Ray Fisman, Paola Giuliano, John Helliwell, Karla Hoff, Sriya Iyer, Ruixue Jia, Gaurav Khanna,
Rachel Kranton, James Kung, Max Kwiek, Suresh Naidu, Jonathan Newton, Jean-Philippe
Platteau, Hillel Rapoport, Imran Rasul, Arthur Robson, Michael Sacks, Claudia Senik, Moses
Shayo, Ludvig Sinander, Josh Tasoff, Thierry Verdier, Cole Williams, Peyton Young, Liyu Zheng,
and participants at numerous conferences and seminars. We thank Michele Mary Bernadine, Grace
Finley, Max Ponce de León, Fernando Secco, and Satish Wasti for outstanding research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Augustin Bergeron, Jean-Paul Carvalho, Joseph Henrich, Nathan Nunn, and Jonathan L.
Weigel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Zero-Sum Environments, the Evolution of Effort-Suppressing Beliefs, and Economic Development
Augustin Bergeron, Jean-Paul Carvalho, Joseph Henrich, Nathan Nunn, and Jonathan L. Weigel
NBER Working Paper No. 31663
September 2023, Revised August 2025
JEL No. N10, O10, Q55
ABSTRACT
We study the evolution of belief systems that suppress productive effort, such as beliefs about envy,
witchcraft, the importance of luck for success, or disdain for competitive effort. In our framework,
demotivating beliefs evolve when interactions are zero-sum, i.e., where one person’s gain comes at
others’ expense. They improve material welfare but reduce subjective well-being. The model delivers
testable predictions about the relationship between the degree of zero-sumness, demotivating beliefs,
material welfare, subjective well-being, and long-run economic development. We find that the
predictions are supported by data from two samples in the Democratic Republic of Congo, as well as
global evidence from the World Values Survey and the European Values Study.
Augustin Bergeron Nathan Nunn
Harvard University University of British Columbia
Department of Economics Vancouver School of Economics
and NBER and Canadian Institute for Advanced
abergeron@fas.harvard.edu Research (CIFAR)
and also NBER
Jean-Paul Carvalho nathan.nunn@ubc.ca
University of Oxford
Department of Economics Jonathan L. Weigel
jean-paul.carvalho@economics.ox.ac.uk University of California, Berkeley
Haas School of Business
Joseph Henrich and NBER
Harvard University jweigel@berkeley.edu
Department of Human Evolutionary Biology
joseph.henrich@gmail.com
An appendix is available at: http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w31663

1. Introduction
Cultural beliefs and values discouraging individual effort and achievement are surprisingly
widespreadtodayandthroughouthistory. Theyoftentaketheformofwarningsagainst,andeven
punishmentfor,personalambitionandsuccess. Awell-knownexampleisbeliefinwitchcraftand
the evil eye, i.e., the ability of certain people to intentionally cause harm via supernatural means,
2014 2015 2022 2009
which acts as a psychic tax on success (Gershman, , , b, Henrich, ). However,
demotivating beliefs come in many forms and can even be found, although sometimes more
subtly,incontemporaryindustrializedsocieties. Forexample,intheNordiccountries,thelawsof
Jante state, “Du skal ikke tro at du er noget” (“do not think that you are anything”), discourage
personal pride or aggrandizement. Similarly, in Australia and New Zealand, “tall poppy” beliefs
encourage people to cut down those who stand out in terms of personal achievement. In Japan,
1
a common phrase warns that “the nail that sticks out will be hammered down.” Other forms of
2006
demotivating belief systems include beliefs in an “unjust world” (Bénabou and Tirole, ),
2006 1996
pessimism (Mansour, Jouini and Napp, ), fatalism (Whelan, ), and anti-materialistic
1999
beliefs that reduce the enjoyment of consumption (Flouri, ). If such beliefs reduce effort
and investment, why are they prevalent across the world and throughout history?
We study this question theoretically and empirically by building on insights from anthro-
1962 1965 1967
pology about the ‘image of limited good,’ first highlighted by George Foster ( , , ,
1972
). According to Foster, the limited and fixed nature of resources in small-scale pre-industrial
societies meant that anything good was scarce and in limited supply. “If ‘Good’ exists in
1965 296
limited amounts which cannot be expanded,” Foster writes ( , p. ), “and if the system
is closed, it follows that an individual or a family can improve their position only at the expense of
others” (emphasis in original). Thus, the presumption in most small-scale societies is that if one
persondoesbetter,somebodyelsemustdoworse. Basedonethnographicresearch,Fosterargued
that this zero-sum worldview was at the root of individual decision-making and cultural traits
that curb social, economic, and political ambition. Such traits include beliefs in the importance
of moderation, feelings of envy and concerns about the envy of others, witchcraft beliefs, an
emphasis on the importance of sharing, and a de-emphasis on the value of hard work, thrift,
1
Sometimes these beliefs and norms are embedded in class-based status systems that stigmatize aspiration and
effortas“socialclimbing”(McCloskey,2010). Accordingly,BritishPrimeMinisterHerbertAsquithpraisedthestudents
ofhisOxfordCollegeforexhibiting“effortlesssuperiority.”
1

and individual exceptionalism. Foster believed this worldview inhibited entrepreneurial activity,
wealth accumulation, innovation, and economic development.
Our analysis makes two contributions. The first is to develop an evolutionary model that tests
the validity of Foster’s assertion that demotivating beliefs arise in zero-sum environments. The
model allows for production that has varying degrees of zero-sumness. While an individual’s
effort increases their output, a portion of their output comes at the cost of another player with
whom they are paired. The production function captures a range of economic interactions with
different degrees of rivalry, ranging from merchants competing over a fixed set of customers
(a completely zero-sum situation) to business partners working together in an enterprise but
dividing the profits from their joint endeavor (a partially zero-sum situation).
We allow individuals to hold incorrect, demotivating beliefs of varying strength that discount
the perceived return to their effort. We also allow for neutral or correct beliefs that correspond
to the true return to effort. We use the term ‘belief system’ or simply ‘belief’ to denote a cultural
trait, such as belief in witchcraft or an unjust world, rather than a probability distribution over
known states of the world. Hence, we treat these beliefs as being updated not through Bayesian
learningbasedonfrequentfeedbackfromtheenvironmentbutthroughsociallearningandother
2
forms of cultural evolution. While individuals choose effort based on their (subjective) beliefs,
cultural evolution is driven by (true) material payoffs.
Within this framework, Foster’s hypothesis can be reframed as: Do demotivating beliefs
emergeinzero-sumenvironments? Andaretheystrongerinmorezero-sumsettings? Ourmodel
showsthatdespitethedistortionsineffortgeneratedbydemotivatingbeliefs,suchbeliefscanstill
emerge and spread when economic interactions are zero-sum in nature. Incorrect demotivating
beliefs arise and, over time, come to dominate the population, reaching fixation. Meanwhile,
accurate non-demotivating beliefs are driven to extinction.
Core to these results is the fact that for zero-sum interactions, equilibrium effort exceeds the
socially optimal level due to the negative externality that an individual’s success imposes on
others. Demotivatingbeliefsmitigatethisbyreducingindividualeffort,therebyimproving(static)
socialefficiency. However,reducedeffortalsodiminishesindividualmaterialpayoffs,whichdrive
the evolutionary process. As a result, demotivating beliefs do not automatically arise. We show
2
An alternative label to ‘demotivating beliefs’ that could be used throughout is ‘demotivating values,’ and it is
thesevaluesthatareformedthroughculturalevolution.
2

that they emerge only under conditions of positive assortative matching – such as homophily,
culturally similar communities, or group-level selection – which occurs when individuals with
similar cultural beliefs are geographically or socially clustered. In such environments, the direct
cost of holding a demotivating belief is outweighed by the benefit of being matched with others
who share the belief and, therefore, do not engage in excessive competition.
More broadly, we find that within a society with a given degree of zero-sumness, there is an
intensity of demotivating belief that maximizes an individual’s income. As a result, the model
predicts a hump-shaped (strictly concave) relationship between the strength of demotivating
beliefs and economic welfare. However, when considering subjective well-being – that is, an
individual’s perceived payoff, inclusive of the demotivating belief – the relationship is markedly
different. For a given level of zero-sumness, subjective well-being is typically maximized at the
true (non-demotivating) belief. Moreover, we find a strictly convex and generally decreasing
relationship between the strength of demotivating beliefs and subjective well-being. Intuitively,
this occurs because demotivating beliefs cause individuals to perceive their situation as worse
than it is, thereby lowering their subjective well-being.
Having derived hypotheses about cross-individual variation within a setting with a set degree
of zero-sumness, we next examine the model’s predictions across environments with varying
degreesofzero-sumness. Themodelpredictsapositiverelationshipbetweenthezero-sumnessof
an individual’s environment and the strength of their demotivating beliefs. However, in contrast
to predictions within a fixed zero-sum environment, the model also predicts that greater zero-
sumness of the environment – and the resulting demotivating beliefs – are associated with lower
material welfare and lower subjective well-being. These negative relationships arise primarily
because zero-sum interactions directly reduce both objective and subjective payoffs.
The paper’s second contribution is empirical. Having formalized Foster’s arguments, we turn
to the data to test the model’s predictions. We begin by analyzing data collected in Kananga,
an urban hub and provincial capital in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). Home
16
to approximately . million people originating from villages and towns across the region, the
city hosts a large and diverse population. Despite its size, Kananga remains pre-industrial: it is
the largest city in the world without consistent electricity or running water, nearly all roads are
unpaved, and agriculture and animal husbandry are common even within the urban landscape.
We use this pre-industrial urban setting to test the model’s prediction of a relationship be-
3

tween the zero-sumness of a person’s environment, their demotivating beliefs, and their material
200 2015
welfare. Our analysis draws on two samples: a -person survey conducted in and a
1000 2019 2015
, -person survey from . We use the sample to develop our zero-sum measure and
explore its relationship with demotivating beliefs. We then validate and replicate the findings in
2019
the larger sample.
Tomeasurethezero-sumnessofarespondent’senvironment,weusemultiplesurveyquestions
asking whether various types of gains – earnings, profits, wealth, gains in trade, power, and
happiness–comeattheexpenseofothers. Wethenuseprincipalcomponentsanalysistoidentify
and distill a single factor that captures the extent to which a person views their environment
as being zero-sum, which serves as our baseline zero-sum measure. We validate this measure
using several strategies. First, we compare it with respondents’ expectations in vignette-based
scenarios, finding that individuals with a higher zero-sum measure are more likely to predict
zero-sum outcomes in the vignettes. Second, we also compare the measure to pre-determined
covariates that are likely indicators of a more zero-sum environment. We find that individuals
withahistoryofworseemploymentconditionsorlowerrainfallintheirvillageoforiginaremore
likely to perceive their current environment as zero-sum.
We then examine the relationship between the zero-sumness of a person’s environment, de-
motivating beliefs, and material welfare. First, we estimate the relationship between zero-sum
perceptionsandthedemotivatingbeliefsemphasizedinFoster’sethnography–specifically,envy
and traditional religious beliefs, commonly referred to as ‘witchcraft.’ In both samples, respon-
dents who perceive their environment as more zero-sum are more envious of others’ success and
more likely to hold traditional religious beliefs. Consistent with the model’s predictions, we also
find that stronger zero-sum perceptions are associated with lower material welfare.
Given the correlational nature of our findings, we also implement an experiment to causally
200
identify the effects of a zero-sum environment. Within the -person sample, we invited groups
of participants to visit a lab and randomly varied the monetary payment (endowment) they
received before participating in other behavioral games. In the zero-sum treatment, they com-
pletedan effortfultask, and theirrelative rankin thetask outcomedeterminedtheir endowment.
Only one person per group could receive the highest payment. In the non-zero-sum condition,
endowments were assigned randomly, with replacement, and independently of any ranking. All
participants could receive the highest payment. Participants then played a Joy of Destruction
4

game, where they could reduce another player’s payoff at a personal cost. This decision was pri-
vate – unobserved by others – but players knew each other’s identities. We find that participants
were more likely to reduce the payoff of those with higher baseline endowments in the zero-sum
treatment but not in the non-zero-sum treatment. These results align with the theory, suggesting
that in zero-sum environments, norms of envy and spite emerge to curb excessive competition.
We then examine the same relationships globally using data from the Integrated Values
Surveys (IVS), which is constructed by combining the World Values Survey (WVS) and European
Values Study (EVS). Although the survey does not ask about envy or witchcraft, it captures a
broader set of demotivating beliefs relevant for more developed countries, which make up the
majority of the IVS sample. These beliefs include the perceived importance of hard work for
economicsuccess,skepticismabouttheroleofeffortindeterminingsuccess,andtheacceptability
of receiving help from others. Consistent with the model’s predictions, we observe a robust
positive association between zero-sum perceptions and demotivating beliefs. While the specific
beliefs vary between the Congolese and IVS samples, in both settings, demotivating beliefs
co-vary with the perceived zero-sumness of one’s environment. We also find that, in line with
the model’s predictions regarding material welfare and subjective well-being, a more zero-sum
environment is associated with lower material welfare, as measured by income, educational
attainment, savings, and occupational status. Furthermore, it is associated with lower subjective
well-being, as measured by life satisfaction and happiness.
ThelargesizeoftheIVSsampleallowsustotestthemodel’spredictionthatacrossindividuals
within a fixed zero-sum environment, there is a level of demotivating belief that maximizes
material welfare. Empirically, we observe a hump-shaped relationship between demotivating
beliefs and economic welfare: among individuals with the same degree of zero-sum perceptions,
those with an intermediate level of demotivating beliefs have the highest incomes. This pattern
holds across all measures of demotivating beliefs. By contrast, the model predicts that within a
fixed zero-sum environment, subjective well-being is maximized by the true (non-demotivating)
belief, is strictly convex, and generally decreases in the strength of demotivating beliefs. Our
findings support this prediction in the IVS data. Among individuals with the same zero-sum
environment, those with stronger demotivating beliefs report lower life satisfaction and less
happiness.
This paper provides a rare empirical application and test of an evolutionary game-theoretic
5

model in economics. While much of the existing literature has focused on the evolution of
trust and other-regarding preferences, we introduce the concept of a demotivating belief system.
2006
Althoughdistortedbeliefsalsoariseinmodelsofmotivatedreasoning(BénabouandTirole, )
2016 2020
and misspecified beliefs (Esponda and Pouzo, , Massari and Newton, ), our model does
not assume psychological motivations or belief misspecification. Instead, we follow the literature
1987
in economics on the evolution of preferences (or indirect evolution) (Frank, , Güth and Yaari,
1992 3
) and show how demotivating beliefs can emerge through cultural evolution. In particular,
2013 2016
we build on the approach of Alger and Weibull ( , ) which relies on positive assortativity.
A particularly novel aspect of our analysis is that we place some structure on the divergence
between material and subjective payoffs and empirically test these predictions.
Our empirical findings also contribute to an important and growing empirical literature on
2007 2007
intergenerationally transmitted cultural traits (e.g., Giuliano, , Fernandez, , Fernández
2009 2012
and Fogli, , Voigtländer and Voth, ). Specifically, they add to research on how the
2011
external environment affects the evolution of cultural traits (Nunn and Wantchekon, , Guiso,
2016 2018
Sapienza and Zingales, , Grosjean and Khattar, , Schulz, Bahrami-Rad, Beauchamp and
2019 2021 2021
Henrich, , Buggle and Durante, , Giuliano and Nunn, ), and the consequences
2009
of these evolved traits for economic development (Spolaore and Wacziarg, , Becker and
2009 2009 2010 2019
Woessmann, , Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales, , Algan and Cahuc, , Enke, ,
2023
Alesina, Hohmann, Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, ). Our paper helps elucidate the role
ofdemotivatingbeliefs,theirrelationshipwithzero-sumenvironments,andtheirimplicationsfor
economic development.
Our belief-based channel complements and extends prior work on social institutions (e.g.,
2013 2017 2020
Carvalho, , Nunn and de la Sierra, , Akerlof, Matouschek and Rayo, ). Most
2015 2016 2020
closely related is Gershman’s ( , , ) seminal work on witchcraft and evil-eye beliefs.
2015
Gershman( )developsamodelinwhichthesebeliefsemergetoreduceanindividual’soutput
2022
and thereby discourage envious destruction. Consistent with our findings, Gershman ( a)
documents a positive relationship between the ‘image of limited good’ and witchcraft beliefs,
2023
and Gershman ( ) finds a negative relationship between witchcraft beliefs and subjective
3
The basic analysis assumes that preferences are observable and can thus alter the behavior of one’s partners in
an interaction (Schelling, 1960, Becker, 1976, Frank, 1988). Due to this strategic (commitment) effect, preferences can
diverge from the objective fitness function (Ok and Vega-Redondo, 2001, Ely and Yilankaya, 2001, Heifetz, Shannon
andSpiegel,2007). SeealsoBisinandVerdier(2000,2017)ontheculturaltransmissionofpreferences.
6

2000
well-being. Our findings also relate to work on sharing norms (Platteau, ). For instance,
2006
Bowles ( ) shows that sharing norms and other forms of reproductive leveling favor the
evolution of cooperation by reducing the gains from defection. We show how a seemingly
unproductive cultural trait – i.e., demotivating beliefs – can improve short-run efficiency and
propagate when the economic environment is zero-sum.
Finally, our findings complement the analysis of Chinoy, Nunn, Sequeira and Stantcheva
(forthcoming), which highlights the importance of Foster’s insights for contemporary U.S. poli-
tics. Their empirical analysis documents relationships between zero-sum thinking and political
views, explaining much of the variation not captured by party affiliation. They also show that
economic mobility and immigration weaken zero-sum perceptions, while enslavement strength-
ensthem. Theserelationshipsprovideadditionalvalidationfortheuseofsurvey-basedzero-sum
measures, which are central to our empirical analysis.
2. The “Image of Limited Good”
In the introduction, we provided examples of demotivating beliefs. At first glance, it is para-
doxical that beliefs and value systems that depress productive effort could emerge and survive.
1962
To help elucidate this puzzle, we turn to the work of anthropologist George Foster (Foster, ,
1967 1972 1960
, ). Based primarily on fieldwork in rural Mexico in the s, he argued that people in
most pre-industrial societies viewed the world as zero-sum. According to this “image of limited
good,” if one person gets ahead, someone else must fall behind.
A zero-sum cognitive orientation arises in a world where essential resources and assets are
indeed in limited supply. Land is limited, so more land for one individual means less land
for another. Similar scarcity applies to romantic partners, authority, and social status. In such
environments, one can only get ahead at the expense of others. Although Foster first proposed
the “image of limited good” as a model of rural Mexican society, he subsequently argued that
zero-sum beliefs emerged around the world, driven by the actual zero-sumness of social and
economic life, particularly in pre-industrial societies with limited trade or economic growth. He
also described a relationship between a zero-sum world and demotivating beliefs, noting that
1961
zero-sum societies appear to lack what McClelland ( ) calls the “need for achievement.”
Thepaper’sfirstgoalistocombinetheseinsightsintoaformalmodelthatconnectsazero-sum
world, demotivating beliefs, effort, material welfare, and economic growth. The second is to take
7

the model and its predictions to the data. In doing so, an important consideration is identifying
and measuring demotivating beliefs. Foster’s writings emphasize envy and supernatural beliefs
like witchcraft and the evil eye, primarily because of his interest in small-scale pre-industrial
societies. Our empirical analysis begins by examining these beliefs, which remain prevalent
across the developing world. We analyze the relationship between perceived zero-sumness of
the environment, traditional supernatural beliefs, and envy in the DRC. The traditional beliefs,
commonlylabeled“witchcraft”inWesternEuropeancultures,typicallyservetodiscourageeffort
because there is often suspicion that personal success arose through the use of witchcraft and at
theexpenseofothers. Envyandconcernsabouttheenvyofothersarealsocommondemotivating
beliefs. In contemporary post-industrial societies, the specific content of demotivating beliefs
differs. But, as noted in the introduction with examples from Scandinavia, Australia, New
Zealand, and Japan, a variety of alternative beliefs discourage personal ambition and success.
3. The Model
We now turn to a model that examines the evolution of demotivating beliefs in an environment
that is more or less zero-sum.
A. Basic Set Up
layers
P . Consideralargepopulationwhichweapproximateasinfinite,formallyacontinuum
of mass one. We view this as a population of individuals who live in the same environment and
can interact with each other. For example, the population could be a neighborhood within a city,
a social group, a village, a district within a country, or a country. We later extend the analysis to
multiple populations.
T ime . Time is continuous and denoted by t ∈ R +.
B elief systems . There is a potentially large but finite set of belief systems Θ = {θ ,θ ,...,θ },
1 2 n
where the intensity of belief i is θ ∈ [0,1], i = 1,2,...,n. We view each θ as a cultural belief (or
i i
trait)ratherthanthemoreconventionalnotionofabeliefasaprobabilitydistributionoverknown
states of the world. As we shall see, θ = 0 is the true belief, and any θ > 0 is a demotivating
i i
belief. (We could also allow for hypermotivating beliefs θ < 0, but such beliefs would not evolve
i
in our setting.) The share of each belief i in the population is denoted by q , with the population
i
state denoted by q = (q ,q ,...,q ) and ∑n q = 1.
1 2 n i=1 i
8

A ctions . Individuals are paired and engage in production. The effort exerted by a trait i
individual is denoted by x
i
∈ R +. The cost of production is
2
1x
i
, and the production function is
√
A x , where A > 0 is the state of technology in the economy.
i
Environments vary in their degree of rivalry or zero-sumness. The degree to which the
environment is zero-sum is measured by α ∈ (0,1], which we assume is known by individuals.
One interpretation is that a fraction α of tasks are zero-sum in nature, meaning that the benefit
to the individual undertaking the task comes at the expense of the player with whom they are
4
paired. For example, if player i invests in better marketing for her shop, an increase in sales can
come from newly created demand or stealing of player j’s customers.
P ayoffs . The true (objective) payoff function to an individual with trait i when matched with
an individual with trait j is
(cid:2) (cid:0) √ √ (cid:1) √ (cid:3)
U(x ,x ) = A α x − x +(1−α) x − 1x
i j i j i 2 i
= A (cid:2) √ x −α √ x (cid:3) − 1x . ( 1 )
i j 2 i
If α = 0, we have a simple production decision: each individual’s payoff is independent of
theirpartner’seffort. Ifα = 1,theenvironmentispurelyzero-sum: allgainscomeattheexpense
1965
of one’s partner. This is what Foster ( ) describes as a “limited good” environment.
Playersmaximizeapotentiallydistortedversionofthetruepayofffunction. Specifically,atrait
i player chooses production effort x to maximize the following subjective payoff:
i
Uˆ (x ,x ) = A (cid:2) (1−θ ) √ x −α √ x (cid:3) − 1x . ( 2 )
i i j i i j 2 i
That is, an individual with a belief system i discounts the return to her effort by a factor
(1−θ ) ∈ [0,1]. Our results are robust to alternative specifications of the subjective payoff
i
function, e.g., beliefs that overestimate the cost of effort or discount the value of total output
(see Appendix B.I). This specification captures various kinds of demotivating belief systems. For
example, individuals may have a (potentially inaccurate) perception about the economic return
to effort in the economy (Bénabou and Tirole, 2006 ). θ > 0 could also be the product of a
i
supernatural belief, such as belief in the evil eye, according to which envious individuals cause
2014 2015
harm to others through supernatural forces (Gershman, , ). Hence, envy exacts a kind
4 Analternativeincomplete-informationinterpretationisthattheenvironmentiszero-sumwithprobabilityα. In
thiscase,whateveranindividualwithtraitigainsthroughproduction,theirpartnerj loses. Withprobability1−α,
i’seffortisfullyproductiveanddoesnotcomeattheexpenseofj.
9

of supernatural tax on effort, with believers expecting to lose a fraction θ of their output. These
i
beliefsystemsreduceperceivedreturnstoeffortandarethusdemotivating. Thehigherthebelief
intensity θ , the more demotivating the belief of individual i.
i
Maximizing ( 2 ) with respect to x , we get optimal production effort for each trait i: 5
i
x∗ = arg max Uˆ (x ,x ) = (1−θ )2A2. ( 3 )
i i i j i
xi ∈R +
atch ayoffs 1992
M P . As in the literature on indirect evolution (e.g., Güth and Yaari, , Ok
2001
and Vega-Redondo, ), while individual choices are based on their subjective payoff functions
2 1 6
given by ( ), evolution is determined by the true payoff function ( ). Denote the equilibrium
(true) payoff to a trait i individual matched with a trait j individual by
U = U(x∗ ,x∗)
ij i j
= (cid:0) 1−θ −α(1−θ )− 1(1−θ )2(cid:1) A2.
i j 2 i
By observation, the payoff to i in an i,j match is strictly decreasing in the intensity of i’s belief
θ andstrictlyincreasingintheintensityofj’sbeliefθ . Therefore,onewouldideallywishtohold
i j
the true belief θ = 0, but be matched with individuals who hold a demotivating belief θ > 0.
i j
A ssortative M atching . The success of trait i is based on its “cultural fitness,” which we
denote by F (q), and is given by the expected payoff across all possible matches. It is, thus, a
i
function of the population state q. We assume partial assortative matching as in Cavalli-Sforza
and Feldman ( 1981 ). Specifically, we introduce a degree of positive assortativity σ such that
an individual is matched with someone who shares their trait with probability σ and with an
individual chosen uniformly at random from the population with probability 1−σ. There is
ampleevidence,whichwesummarizeinAppendixB.V,forpositiveassortativityonculturaltraits
in human populations, ranging from small-scale hunter-gatherer bands to modern large-scale
societies. We also show how this particular population structure can be the outcome of stable
1962 7
matching when individuals can choose whom to match with (Gale and Shapley, ).
5 Since i’s marginal utility is independent of j’s choice, the results do not depend on whether individuals have
completeorincompleteinformationregardingtheirpartner’strait.
6
Ourresultsarepreservedwhenthefitnessfunctionisaconvexcombinationofmaterialandsubjectivepayoffs.
7 Anotherinterpretationisthatσ isaproxyforgroup-levelselectioninthepopulation. Forexample,considerthe
populationbeingsplitintotwogroups,labeled1and2. Supposetraitihasachievedfixation(i.e.,ispresentin100%
of the population) in group 1 and trait j has achieved fixation in group 2. The index of assortativity σ is then the
likelihoodofawithin-populationmatch.
10

8
Given an index of assortativity σ, the cultural fitness of belief i is:
n
∑
F
i
(q) = σU
ii
+(1−σ) q
j
U
ij
j=1
(cid:16) (cid:17) n
= (1−θ
i
) 1− 1
2
(1−θ
i
) A2−σα(1−θ
i
)A2−(1−σ)αA2 ∑ q
j
(1−θ
j
). (4)
j=1
B. Cultural Evolution
The evolution of beliefs in the population is given by a dynamic operating on the n-dimensional
unit simplex. We place a minimal restriction that the distribution of beliefs q evolves according
to a deterministic payoff monotone dynamic: for all i,j such that q > 0 and q > 0,
i j
dqi dqj
F i (q) > = F j (q) ⇐⇒ dt > = dt .
< q < q
i j
That is, if the payoff to trait i is higher than the payoff to trait j, then i’s population share
grows faster. A leading example is the replicator dynamic, which can be the product of natural
2010
selection, imitation, or reinforcement learning (Sandholm, ).
Wefirstshowthatthebeliefintensitywiththehighestculturalfitnessvis-à-visanyotherbelief
intensity is θ∗ = σα, i.e., the product of the degree of positive sorting in interactions and the
degree to which the environment is zero-sum. Recall that the (true) non-demotivating belief is
θ = 0. We denote the population shares of these beliefs at time t by q∗(t) and q0(t), respectively.
Proposition 1 . Evolution of Demotivating Beliefs. Cultural evolution selects a belief system as
follows. If there is a belief close to θ∗ = σα, then the true belief θ = 0 will be driven to extinction, and all
individuals will have a ‘distorted’ view of the world. If θ∗ is in the set of beliefs, then eventually, the entire
population will hold this belief. Formally:
(i) If the set of beliefs Θ contains θ < 2σα and the initial state is such that q0(0) < 1, then q0(t)
i
converges monotonically to zero. Otherwise, lim t→∞q0(t) = 1.
(ii) If the set of beliefs Θ contains θ∗ = σα and the initial state is such that q∗(0) > 0, then q∗(t)
converges monotonically to one.
All proofs are in Appendix A.
8 Since x∗ is independent of α, the fitness of each belief i does not depend on individuals having accurate
i
perceptionsaboutthedegreeofzero-sumness.
11

Even though they represent inaccurate representations of the world, demotivating belief sys-
tems can survive and spread through the population. According to part (i) of the proposition,
as long as demotivating beliefs are present initially and are not too intense given the degree
of zero-sumness α > 0 and index of assortativity σ > 0, the true belief θ = 0 will be driven
to extinction. Only demotivating beliefs will survive in the population. Part (ii) tells us that
the demotivating belief with intensity θ∗ = σα will win out, driving all other belief systems to
extinction. Hence, under positive assortativity (σ > 0), the belief intensity that is selected is
9
strictly increasing in the degree of zero-sumness α. These results do not depend on the specific
form of the payoff monotone cultural dynamic. In addition, even when q∗(0) = 0, Corollary
1 in Appendix A shows that evolution will select a belief intensity in support of q(0) that is
approximately equal to θ∗.
The intuition for the survival of (incorrect) demotivating beliefs is as follows. The belief θ > 0
depresses effort below the first-best level by discounting the return to effort. The direct effect of
this distortion is to reduce cultural fitness. There is also an indirect effect we call the ‘interactive
effect,’ which is an increase in the likelihood of being matched with someone with demotivating
beliefsandwhoexertslittleeffort. Wheninteractionsareprimarilyzero-sum(αislarge)andthere
isahighdegreeofassortativematching(σislarge),theinteractiveeffectdominates. Demotivating
beliefs evolve and internalize part of the negative externalities in such environments.
TheseresultsarerelatedtoAlgerandWeibull’s( 2012 )workonHomomoralisandaltruisticpref-
erences. Altruisticpreferencesandournotionofdemotivatingbeliefsarebehaviorallyequivalent
since both cultural traits can produce the same effort choices. However, they differ in how they
10
respond to the zero-sumness of the environment, which yields distinct empirical predictions.
We establish this in Appendix B.II. In Appendix B.III, we also show that our results are robust
to the inclusion of different types of effort, i.e., pro-social and anti-social, with demotivation only
occurring for the latter. Finally, in Appendix B.IV, we show that the same results occur when
demotivating beliefs are driven in a top-down manner by a cultural leader or institution that
tunes the intensity of demotivation over time to maximize the spread of the demotivating belief.
9 Thisresulthelpsusunderstandpart(i). The(true)non-demotivatingbeliefθ=0isdriventoextinctionwhenever
thereisademotivatingbeliefthatiscloserthanittotherelativefitnessmaximizingbeliefθ∗ =σα.
10
In particular, the evolutionarily stable demotivating belief depends on the degree to which the environment is
zero-sum. Theevolutionarilystabledegreeofaltruismdoesnot. Ifsurveyresponsessuchas“competitionisnotgood”
onlyreflectaltruism,thentheyshouldnotvarywithzero-sumness,whichcontradictsourempiricalresults.
12

C. The Effect of Demotivating Beliefs on Material Welfare and Subjective Well-Being
We have seen that demotivating beliefs have an ‘interactive effect’ at the individual level that
enables them to spread through the population. We now turn to the social efficiency of such
beliefs. Ourefficiencycriterion,whichwerefertoasmaterialwelfare,isafunctionoftheobjective
payoffs,whichserveastheculturalfitnessofeachbelief. Specifically,materialwelfareattimetfor
apersonholdingbeliefθ istheobjective(ortrue)payoffgivenby( 1 )evaluatedattheequilibrium
i
effort levels (x∗)n and averaged over all interactions:
i i=1
(cid:34) (cid:35)
n
W (t) = F (q(t)) = σU(x∗ ,x∗)+(1−σ) ∑ q (t)U(x∗ ,x∗) . ( 5 )
i i i i j i j
j=1
Proposition 2 . Demotivating Beliefs and Material Welfare. Material welfare at time t is highest for
the holders of belief θ∗ = σα and strictly concave in θ.
The proposition, which holds regardless of the initial condition q(0), shows that there is a
demotivating belief (θ∗ = σα) that maximizes i’s material welfare. Deviations from θ∗ in either
direction reduce material welfare. In other words, there is a hump-shaped relationship between
material welfare and the intensity of demotivating beliefs.
We also examine the effect of demotivating beliefs on perceived welfare, which we refer to as
“subjectivewell-being.” Wedefinesubjectivewell-beingattimetforapersonholdingbeliefθ as
i
the subjective payoff given by ( 2 ) evaluated at the equilibrium effort levels (x∗)n and averaged
i i=1
over all interactions:
(cid:34) (cid:35)
n
Wˆ (t) = σUˆ (x∗ ,x∗)+(1−σ) ∑ q (t)Uˆ (x∗ ,x∗) . ( 6 )
i i i i j i i j
j=1
Proposition 3 . Demotivating Beliefs and Subjective Well-Being. Subjective well-being at time t is
strictlydecreasingintheintensityofdemotivatingbeliefsθifθ < 1−σα. Otherwise,itisincreasinginthe
intensity of demotivating beliefs. Subjective well-being is also strictly convex in θ. Finally, for σα < 1/2,
subjective well-being is highest for the true belief θ = 0.
Unlike material welfare, which is hump-shaped in the intensity of demotivating beliefs, sub-
jective well-being is strictly decreasing in θ, as long as the most intense demotivating belief in the
set of beliefs is not too intense: maxΘ ≤ 1−σα. Otherwise, subjective well-being is increasing
13

forthehighestvaluesofθ. EvenwhenmaxΘ > 1−σα, numericalexamplesshowthatsubjective
well-being rises only slightly for higher values of θ, even with high degrees of positive sorting
1
(see Figure A ).
Regardless of the shape of the function, subjective well-being is highest for the true non-
demotivating belief θ = 0. This is true as long as σ < 1, a condition that we expect to
2
hold. Even for hunter-gatherers, who exhibit a high degree of positive assortativity on cultural
traits, estimates of σ are typically well below 0 . 5 (Smith, Larroucau, Mabulla and Apicella, 2018 ,
2018
Henrich, ). Thus,subjectivewell-beingcontrastswithmaterialwelfare,whichwehaveshown
is maximized at θ∗ > 0 (for σα > 0).
The reason why demotivating beliefs have a different effect on material welfare and subjective
well-being is as follows. Material welfare is hump-shaped in θ due to the tradeoff between the
direct cost of a distorted belief system and the interactive benefit of being matched with a less
motivated partner. There is no such tradeoff for subjective well-being since individuals choose
effort to maximize their subjective payoff. Instead, there is an “affective cost” from discounting
thematerialpayoffby1−θ,whichmakespeoplefeeltheyaredoingworsethantheyactuallyare.
This affective cost is hump-shaped in θ, causing subjective well-being to be typically decreasing
in θ. Thus, Propositions 2 and 3 predict a divergence between material welfare and subjective
well-being. These are testable predictions that we take to the data.
D. Comparative Dynamics across Populations
Thus far, we have considered a population interacting in an environment characterized by a
fixed degree of zero-sumness, α. In reality, even within a given society, there can be multiple
socioeconomic and geographic niches with different degrees of zero-sumness. We now generate
predictions comparing populations interacting in environments with different degrees of zero-
sumness. This allows us to derive cross-population predictions, which we also take to the data.
Consider a finite set of populations indexed by k ∈ {1,2,...,K}. The degree to which the
environment faced by population k is zero-sum is αk, and the populations are ordered such that
k > k′ implies αk > αk′ . To focus on the degree of zero-sumness αk, we assume each population
11
has the same index of assortativity σ > 0 and set of beliefs Θ.
11 Weassumeunchangingαk. Ifweweretoallowtheenvironmenttochange,allresultswouldapplyregardlessof
thehistoryofαk ineachpopulation,aslongasenoughtimehaspassedsincethelastenvironmentalchange.
14

We begin by analyzing the relationship between zero-sumness, on the one hand, and demoti-
vating beliefs, effort, material welfare, and subjective well-being, on the other, across populations
k ∈ K. Define the population k share of belief i at time t by qk(t) and the population k state
i
by qk(t). The mean demotivating belief, mean level of effort, mean material welfare, and mean
subjective well-being in population k at time t are defined, respectively, as:
n n n n
θk(t) = ∑ qk(t)θ , Xk(t) = ∑ qk(t)x∗ , Wk(t) = ∑ qk(t)Wk(t), Wˆ k(t) = ∑ qk(t)Wˆ k(t) ( 7 )
i i i i i i i i
i=1 i=1 i=1 i=1
where x∗ is given by ( 3 ), Wk(t) is given by ( 5 ), and Wˆ k(t) is given by ( 6 ). If we also assume a
i i i
(cid:8) (cid:9)
regular environment where the set of beliefs is the discrete grid Θ = 0, 1, 2,...1 and the initial
∆ ∆
state q(0) has full support on Θ, we can then state three propositions. First, demotivating beliefs
vary with the zero-sumness of the environment as follows:
Proposition 4 . Zero-Sum Environments and Demotivating Beliefs. Consideraregularenvironment
with a sufficiently fine set of beliefs (∆ large). If cultural evolution is allowed enough time to operate, the
mean demotivating belief will be higher in populations with higher degrees of zero-sumness.
Second, effort and material welfare vary with zero-sumness as follows:
Proposition 5 . Zero-Sum Environments and Economic Outcomes. Consider a regular environment
with a sufficiently fine set of beliefs (∆ large). If cultural evolution is allowed enough time to operate, the
mean effort and material welfare will be lower in populations with higher degrees of zero-sumness.
Third, subjective well-being varies with zero-sumness as follows:
Proposition 6 . Zero-Sum Environments and Subjective Well-Being. If, in addition to the conditions
of Proposition 5, σ ≤ 1 or αK ≤ 11+σ, then mean subjective well-being will also be lower in populations
2 σ2+σ
with higher degrees of zero-sumness.
Hence, under the stated conditions, there exists a finite time T such that for all t ≥ T, θk(t) is
strictlyincreasinginαk andXk(t),Wk(t),andWˆ k(t) arestrictlydecreasinginαk. Thatis,where
a population interacts in a more zero-sum environment, it will eventually hold more intense
demotivating beliefs, and, as a consequence, exert less effort, have lower material welfare, and
experience lower subjective well-being. This applies independently of the precise form of payoff
monotone cultural dynamic or of the initial conditions for each population, as long as they are
interior.
15

The intuition behind the proposition’s additional condition for the prediction of subjective
well-being is as follows. There are three effects of a more zero-sum environment on subjective
well-being. The first is to increase negative externalities and thereby lower subjective well-being.
Theremainingtwoeffectsdependonthelimitingdemotivatingbelief,θ∗ = σαk,beingincreasing
in zero-sumness. The second effect arises because increased demotivating beliefs discount the
returns to effort by approximately 1−θ∗, which reduces well-being by making an individual’s
situation seem worse than it is. The third effect raises well-being by producing demotivating
beliefs that internalize part of the negative externalities from zero-sum interactions. When posi-
tive assortativity σ and the degree of zero-sumness αk are large, the third effect dominates, and
subjective well-being can rise with αk. As noted, empirically, this is unlikely because estimates
of σ in human populations are typically below 0 . 5 (Smith et al., 2018 , Henrich, 2018 ). Moreover,
numerical examples indicate that Wˆ k only increases slightly with αk and on a small part of the
2
domain (see Figure A ).
4 6
Propositions - also have implications for the relationship between demotivating beliefs, eco-
12
nomicoutcomes,andsubjectivewell-beingacrosspopulations,whichwesummarizeasfollows.
Proposition 7 . Demotivating Beliefs, Economic Outcomes, and Subjective Well-being. Under the
conditions of Propositions 4-6, there exists a finite time T such that, for all t ≥ T, θk(t) > θk′(t) implies
Xk(t) < Xk′(t), Wk(t) < Wk′(t), and Wˆ k(t) < Wˆ k′(t).
That is, mean effort, material welfare, and subjective well-being are all strictly decreasing in a popula-
tion’s mean demotivating belief.
The theory thus generates a subtle but important point: within a society characterized by a
given degree of zero-sumness, demotivating beliefs can increase material welfare (Proposition
2
). However, across societies with varying degrees of zero-sumness, demotivating beliefs are
7
associated with lower material welfare (Proposition ). This is due to the variation in zero-
sumnessacrosspopulations,leadingtobothmoreintensedemotivatingbeliefsandlowermaterial
welfare.
12 Propositions4–7delivercomparativestaticsfromanyinitialconditionaslongassufficienttimehaspassed. They
donotrequiret→∞.
16

From Theory to Empirics
2 3
Wenowtakethepredictionsfromourtheorytothedata. Propositions and concerntheeffectof
2
varyingdemotivatingbeliefsforagivenzero-sumnessoftheenvironment. Proposition predicts
a hump-shaped relationship between demotivating beliefs and income when looking within
3
an environment with a fixed degree of zero-sumness. By contrast, Proposition suggests that
happiness is maximized by the true (non-demotivating) belief θ = 0 and is generally decreasing
in the strength of one’s demotivating belief. Together, the two propositions predict a divergence
between material welfare and subjective well-being.
4 6
Propositions – examine variation across environments with varying degrees of zero-
4
sumness. Proposition predictsthatamorezero-sumenvironmentwillincreasetheprevalenceof
5 6
demotivating beliefs in the population. Propositions and demonstrate that, as a consequence,
reduced effort, lower levels of material welfare, and worse subjective well-being should be found
7
in more zero-sum environments. An implication, which is summarized in Proposition , is that a
stronger presence of demotivating beliefs should be associated with lower levels of effort, lower
material welfare, and lower subjective well-being.
We test these predictions in two settings. The first is a pre-industrial setting in the DRC,
similar to that studied by Foster. Here, we use information from surveys and experiments,
gathered through our fieldwork. The second is an industrialized global sample that is beyond
what Foster considered. The sample, which relies on publicly available survey data from the
WVS and EVS, provides a much larger sample and sufficient variation to test all predictions of
the model, including those concerning cross-individual variation in an environment where α is
2 3
fixed (Propositions and ).
4. Testing the Model in the Developing World: Evidence from the DRC
A. Data Collection
Our empirical analysis draws on two samples from Kananga, the capital of the Kasaï-Central
2015 2019
province in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), collected in and . The city
16
has a population of roughly . million.
2015 200 2019
The sampleincludesapproximately individuals,whilethe sampleincludesabout
1000
, individuals. Respondentswererandomlyselected, subjecttoinclusioncriteriaensuringad-
17

equateethnicrepresentation. Allsurveyswereconductedface-to-faceatrespondents’homes. We
2015
usethe sampletodevelopandvalidateourmeasureofthezero-sumnessoftheenvironment
4
and to examine its relationship with demotivating beliefs and material welfare (Propositions
5 7
and ) as well as the effect of demotivating beliefs on material welfare (Proposition ). We then
2019 13 2015
replicate these patterns in the larger sample. We also conducted a lab experiment in
that randomly varied the zero-sumness of the environment, allowing us to assess whether the
observed relationships are plausibly causal.
The years in which these two surveys were administered offer another source of variation
2016 2017
relevant to our theory. Between mid- and late- , a violent conflict swept through the
5000 14
region, claiming an estimated , lives. The conflict triggered a substantial influx of foreign
aid. For the first time, major NGOs such as Médecins Sans Frontières, the International Rescue
2015
Committee,andHandicapInternationalestablishedoperationsinthecity. Unlikethe survey,
2019
the survey took place after the conclusion of the violence and at the height of the influx of
foreignaid, which, atleastanecdotally, createdalesszero-sumenvironment. Forthisreason, our
empirical analysis reports results disaggregated by survey wave, in addition to pooled estimates
(with survey year fixed effects).
B. Measuring a Zero-Sum World
Central to our analysis is the extent to which the world is zero-sum, denoted by α. Since we
cannot directly observe the zero-sumness of each respondent’s environment, we measure their
perception instead. While perceived α is an imperfect proxy, this poses no conceptual issues,
as our theoretical results hold even if individuals form biased beliefs about the zero-sumness of
15
their environment. The challenge is therefore empirical – specifically, how well perceptions of
zero-sumness align with reality. Fortunately, substantial evidence shows that these perceptions
are shaped by the actual zero-sum nature of the world. For instance, in the United States, zero-
sum perceptions strongly correlate with factors that shape the zero-sumness of the environment,
13
AppendixSprovidesfurtherdetailsonsurveydesignandsampling.
14
A local militia known as the Kamuina Nsapu contested the national government. Although most violence
occurredinruralvillages,themilitiaseizedlandnearKananga,includingtheairport,andtherewasactivefightingin
thecityinearly2017.
15 Demotivatingbeliefsareshapedthroughadynamicprocessdrivenbyα,andindividuals’(mis)perceptionsofα
donotinfluencethisprocess.
18

includingeconomicgrowth,intergenerationalmobility,immigration,andenslavement(Chinoyet
4
al., forthcoming). We further validate this relationship in our empirical setting in Section .C.
Wemeasurerespondents’perceivedαusingsixsurveyquestionsdesignedtogaugetheextent
to which they believe that the gains achieved by an individual or group come at the expense of
others. Each question presents respondents with two contrasting statements, asking how much
they agree with one over the other. For example, In Kananga, people only make money when others
lose money, versus In Kananga, no one needs to lose money for others to make money. All six statement
1
pairs are reported in Table .
After being told the two statements, respondents then choose one of the following options:
1 1 2
“agree strongly with statement ,” “agree with statement ,” “agree with statement ,” or “agree
2 1 4
stronglywithstatement .” Foreachquestion,weassignascorerangingfrom – ,increasingwith
the extent to which the response reflects a zero-sum belief. We then apply principal component
analysis (PCA) to construct an index of zero-sumness based on the first principal component,
35 200 36 1000
whichexplains %ofthevarianceinthe -personsampleand %inthe , -personsample.
1
Table reports the estimated weights for the first principal component. In both samples,
1 2
all six variables load positively, with similar magnitude (columns and ). This consistency is
informative. Ex-ante,itisunclearwhetherthereexistsageneralizedperception–or“worldview”
as Foster describes it – of zero-sumness that applies equally to income, wealth, trade, power, and
happiness, and to life in Kananga and in the village. The similar PCA weights suggest a shared
16
zero-sum perspective across these different domains and settings.
200
Inthe -personsample,weincludedadditionalzero-sumquestions,introducingnewscenar-
ios(e.g.,farming)andmorevariedlanguage(e.g.,“created”vs.“takingfromothers”;“exploiting
others” vs. “without exploiting”; “helps people” vs. “hurts people”). We then constructed an
additional measure of zero-sum views by incorporating these four questions. The PCA estimates
3 1
for this extended measure are shown in column of Table . The variables generally load
17
as expected. Our measure of zero-sum is very similar whether we use six or ten questions.
098
Their correlation coefficient is . . All of the findings we report using our baseline six-question
16
It may seem surprising that happiness is viewed as zero-sum, given that, in principle, everyone can be happy.
However, if happiness is determined primarily by prestige, power, income, and/or wealth – which are perceived as
zero-sum–thenitisnaturalthathappinesswillbeperceivedasbeingzero-sum.
17
Thefactorloadingsareclosetozeroforthewealth-relatedquestionsthatusethephrases“created”versus“taking
fromothers”and“exploitingothers.” Thissuggeststhat,consistentwithFoster,respondentsdonotperceiveindividual
wealthasliterallybeingstolen. Instead,theyviewthesystemashaving“limitedgood.”
19

Table1: PrincipalComponentAnalysisforZero-SumIndices
(1) (2) (3)
6questionindex 6questionindex 10questionindex
Zero-sumsurveyquestions
(200sample) (1,000sample) (200sample)
1.InKananga,peopleonlymakemoneywhenotherslosemoney 0.467 0.469 0.434
2.InKananga,nooneneedlosemoneyforotherstomakemoney
1.InKananga,businessesonlymakemoneywhenotherslosemoney 0.400 0.471 0.381
2.InKananga,nooneneedlosemoneyforbusinessestomakemoney
1.Ifonepersoninavillagegetsverywealthy,otherpeopleinthevillagewillbecomepoorer 0.320 0.378 0.306
2.Ifonepersoninavillagegetsverywealthy,otherpeopleinthevillagewillnotnecessarilybecomepoorer
1.Intrade,ifonepartygainstheotherpartyloses 0.325 0.413 0.289
2.Intrade,itispossibleforbothpartiestogainatthesametime
1.Apersoncanonlygainpowerbytakingitawayfromothers 0.453 0.362 0.451
2.Apersoncangainpowerwithouttakingitawayfromothers
1.Gaininghappinessrequirestakingitawayfromothers 0.456 0.336 0.436
2.Itispossibleforeveryonetobehappy
1.Ifonefarmerhasaverylargecrop,hisneighborislikelytoalsohaveaverylargecrop 0.277
2.Ifonefarmerhasaverylargecrop,hisneighborislikelytohaveasmallcrop
1.Thesuccessofthewealthygenerallyhelpsotherpeopleinthecommunity 0.127
2.Thesuccessofthewealthygenerallyhurtsotherpeopleinthecommunity
1.Mostwealthiscreatedwithoutexploitingothers 0.049
2.Mostwealthisobtainedbyexploitingothers
1.Mostofthewealthoftherichwascreatedwithouttakingitfromothers -0.032
2.Mostofthewealthoftherichwasobtainedbytakingitfromothers
Eigenvalue 2.067 2.169 2.209
Proportionofvarianceexplained 0.345 0.362 0.221
Observations 205 984 193
Notes:Thetablereportstheestimatedfactorloadingsfromthreeprincipalcomponentanalyses.Eachsetofestimatesisreportedinonecolumn,withtheeigenvalueofthefirst
principalcomponentreportedinthebottompanel. Thequestionsusedintheprincipalcomponentanalysesarerespondents’self-reportedperceptionsofhowzero-sumthe
worldis,andrespondentschoosefromoneoffouroptions:“agreestronglywithstatement1,”“agreewithstatement1,”“agreewithstatement2,”and“agreestronglywith
statement2.”Columns1and2reportthefactorloadingsfromthefirstprincipalcomponentusingthesetofsixsurveyquestionswiththe200-personand1,000-personsamples,
respectively.Column3reportsthefactorloadingsofthefirstprincipalcomponentusingthesetof10questionsforthe200-personsample.
zero-sum index are similar if we instead use the ten-question index.
C. Validating the Zero-Sum Indices
Although it is reassuring that our zero-sum survey questions, covering various outcomes (hap-
piness, power, gains from trade, income, wealth, crop yields) and actors (individuals/people,
tradingparties,villagers,farmers,citizensinKananga,andbusinessesinKananga)arecorrelated,
we conduct additional tests to validate the link between perceived and actual zero-sumness.
First, we compare the distribution of zero-sum perceptions across the two surveys. Given the
2019
unprecedentedinflowofforeignaidbeforethe survey,weexpectthatperiodtobeperceived
2015
as less zero-sum than . For residents of Kananga, the aid may have been seen as “enlarging
the pie,” enabling gains for many, which mirrors Foster’s notion of “treasure” – a non-zero-sum
resource, where one person’s gain does not come at another’s expense. Consistent with this
3
view, weobserveasubstantialshiftinthedistributionofzero-sumindices(FigureE ). Themean
20

0372 2015 0158 201918
zero-sum perception falls from . in to . in .
200
Second,wecompareoursurveymeasurestoarevealedmeasureofzero-sumviews. Inthe -
person sample, respondents were presented with vignettes paired with illustrations to enhance
19 4
comprehension. In one scenario, shown in Figure E a, respondents were asked about two
1 10
women, Kapinga and Tshilomba, who sell bananas. On day , Kapinga sells bananas, and
20 2 20
Tshilombasells . Onday ,Kapingasells bananas. Respondentswerethenaskedhowmany
2 10 40
bananastheythoughtTshilombasoldonday ,withoptionsof or . Ifrespondentsperceived
10
sales as zero-sum, they would likely assume Tshilomba sold bananas. If they believed that
sales were not zero-sum, they might expect Tshilomba’s sales to also double, meaning she sold
40 4
bananas. A second vignette, shown in Figure E b, presents an analogous scenario with two
farmers growing maize. The responses to these vignettes align well with the zero-sum indices:
respondentswhochosethezero-sumresponsehadsignificantlyhigherscoresonthesix-question
4 4 4 4
index (Figures E c and E d) and the ten-question index (Figures E e and E f).
Third, we examine the relationship between zero-sum perceptions and factors that are likely
200
to influence the actual zero-sum nature of the environment. In the -person survey, we
collected data on the employment history of respondents and their families. Drawing on Foster’s
observationthatpre-industrialeconomicoccupations,suchasfarming,weremorezero-sumthan
20
employment in modern sectors, we explore whether households with recent formal employ-
ment,comparedtothoseinagricultureorunemployment,reporttheirenvironmentasbeingmore
zero-sum. Wecreateformalemploymentindicatorvariablesfortherespondent,theirmother,and
their father. Each is negatively associated with the zero-sumness of a respondent’s environment
1 1 6
(Table C , columns – ). Alternative measures that capture recent employment (i.e., whether the
respondent got a job in the past five years or whether any member of the nuclear family had a
job in the past five years) also reveal a negative relationship between formal employment and
7 10
zero-sum perceptions (columns – ).
Given potential concerns about the endogeneity of current or recent employment, we also
20
examinetherelationshipbetweenrainfallinrespondents’villageoforiginduringthefirst (and
18 While the means differ, the standard deviations are fairly similar, although slightly higher in 2019. This is
consistentwithheterogeneousexposuretoaid,whichdidnotreachallresidentsequally,generatingmorevariationin
perceivedzero-sumness.
19
SeeAppendixS.IIIforthefulltextofthevignettes.
20
Foster writes, “additional hard work in village productive enterprises simply does not produce a significant
incrementinincome...Itisnotgoingtoofartosaythatinagriculturethereisnowayreallytogetahead...Tobecome
richonemustleaveagriculture.” (Foster,1965,p.307).
21

30
) years of their lives and zero-sum perceptions. Higher rainfall is expected to benefit farming
(the primary activity in villages), resulting in a less zero-sum environment. We expect this to
matter for respondents even when they no longer live in the village due to enduring familial and
social connections, along with norms of redistribution which are strong in the region. Indeed,
respondents from villages with higher rainfall during their early years perceive the world as less
2
zero-sum(TableC ). Overall,thesedifferentanalysesreinforcethatzero-sumperceptionstendto
reflect the actual zero-sumness of a person’s environment.
D. Estimating Equations and Regression Estimates
4
We now empirically examine Proposition , the relationship between the zero-sum index and
demotivating beliefs, specifically envy and witchcraft.
200
In our model, we do not specify the definition of a group. Since our samples comprise
1000 16
or , people drawn from a total population of . million, we assume that each observation
is drawn from a different “group” in the city. This assumption aligns with the rich variation we
observe in individuals’ perceptions of the zero-sumness of the world. We estimate the following
individual-level equation:
y = α +βZeroSum +X Ω+ϵ , ( 8 )
i e(i) i i i
where i indexes individuals. The dependent variable y captures one of our demotivating beliefs
i
of interest, either envy or indigenous religious beliefs. The term α denotes ethnicity fixed
e(i)
effects. ThevectorX includesdemographiccontrolsforage,agesquared,agenderindicator,and
i
itsinteractionwithageandagesquared. Ourbaselineestimatesuserobuststandarderrors,while
auxiliary estimatesallow for variousforms of non-independence. As hypothesized byFoster and
predictedbyourtheory,weexpectamorezero-sumviewoftheworldtobeassociatedwithmore
envy and stronger indigenous witchcraft beliefs: β > 0.
2 8 200 1000
Table reports the estimates of equation ( ) using the -person sample (panel A), the , -
21
person sample (panel B), and the pooled sample combining both (panel C). Our first outcome
22
is envy, measured as the first principal component of four survey questions. The first three
questions inquire about feelings of frustration when people succeed easily, resentment towards
21 As we report in Tables E12, the relationship between zero-sum perceptions and envy, beliefs in witchcraft, and
beliefsinChristianityareofsimilarmagnitudeandsignificancewhenweusetheten-questionzero-sumindexavailable
inthe200-personsampleandintroducedinSection4.B.
22
The precise wording of each question is provided in Appendix S.I, with factor loadings for the first principal
componentreportedinTableE8.
22

a neighbor’s success, and feelings of injustice towards those perceived as highly talented. The
fourth question asks whether the respondent sometimes wishes that rich and powerful people
23
would lose their advantage.
We find a positive and statistically significant relationship between zero-sum perceptions and
1 2
envy in both samples, with or without ethnicity fixed effects (columns and ). The magnitudes
are also meaningful. Since both variables are measured in indices without natural units, we
200
interpret effect sizes using a one-standard-deviation increase in the zero-sum index. In the -
person sample, this yields 0.191×0.333 = 0.064, which is 20 . 2 % of the mean (0.064/0.317) and
33 . 0 % of the standard deviation (0.064/0.194). In the 1 , 000 -person sample, the effect is 0.189×
0.156 = 0.029, equal to 19 . 1 % of the mean (0.029/0.152) and 19 . 1 % of the standard deviation
(0.029/0.152). While sizable in both samples, the estimated effects are consistently smaller in
2019
the data, a pattern that holds across specifications. This is consistent with our expectation.
The evolutionary model generates predictions based on long-run differences in environmental
2019
zero-sumness. By contrast, the aid surge was temporary and likely distributed in ways
that were idiosyncratic and uncorrelated with the underlying structure of the environment. As a
result, classical measurement error in the key independent variable may attenuate the observed
relationship.
We next examine the relationship between zero-sum perceptions and traditional religious
3 4
beliefs. The outcome in columns and is the intensity of witchcraft beliefs, measured as the
first principal component of four questions assessing belief in traditional religion, frequency of
prayer to ancestors, participation in ancestor rituals, and feelings of closeness to non-Christians
24 4
in Kananga. Consistent with Proposition , we find a strong positive relationship between
200
zero-sum perceptions and witchcraft beliefs in the -person sample. Again, we find a weaker
1000
association in the , -person sample. The estimate is much smaller in magnitude and is
statistically insignificant.
4
An empirical implication of Proposition is that belief systems imposing less psychological
tax on effort and success (i.e., low θ) should have a weaker hold in more zero-sum environments
(i.e., high α). One such belief system is Christianity, which has gained prominence in recent
23
Thesevariablescapturerespondents’feelingsofenvyratherthantheirbeliefaboutothers’envy. Weoperateon
the premise that a primary determinant of belief about others’ behavior is one’s own behavior. Therefore, we use
respondents’feelingsofenvyasaproxyfortheirperceptionsofothers’envy.
24 SeeAppendixS.IforthewordingofthequestionsandTableE9fortheprincipalcomponentfactorloadings.
23

Table2: Zero-SumIndexofSixSurveyQuestions,Envy,andWitchcraftintheDRC
DependentVariable:Principal-ComponentBasedMeasuresof:
Envy DifferenceBetween
ofOthers’ Witchcraft Christianity Witchcraft&
Success Beliefs Beliefs Christianity
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
PanelA:200PersonSample(2015)
Zero-sumindex,0-1 0.333*** 0.345*** 0.320*** 0.273*** -0.146** -0.143** 0.466*** 0.416***
(0.064) (0.077) (0.093) (0.091) (0.064) (0.067) (0.123) (0.123)
Meandependentvariable 0.317 0.317 0.223 0.223 0.750 0.750 -0.527 -0.527
Std.dev.dependentvariable 0.194 0.194 0.264 0.264 0.192 0.192 0.385 0.385
Meanindependentvariable 0.371 0.371 0.373 0.373 0.373 0.373 0.373 0.373
Std.dev.independentvariable 0.191 0.191 0.189 0.189 0.189 0.189 0.189 0.189
Observations 204 204 197 197 197 197 197 197
Rsquared 0.118 0.166 0.073 0.128 0.062 0.118 0.078 0.148
PanelB:1,000PersonSample(2019)
Zero-sumindex,0-1 0.156*** 0.154*** 0.035 0.035 -0.051*** -0.051*** 0.086*** 0.087***
(0.025) (0.026) (0.027) (0.027) (0.016) (0.016) (0.033) (0.033)
Meandependentvariable 0.152 0.152 0.020 0.020 0.871 0.871 -0.851 -0.851
Std.dev.dependentvariable 0.152 0.152 0.108 0.108 0.109 0.109 0.171 0.171
Meanindependentvariable 0.158 0.158 0.158 0.158 0.158 0.158 0.158 0.158
Std.dev.independentvariable 0.189 0.189 0.189 0.189 0.189 0.189 0.189 0.189
Observations 984 984 984 984 984 984 984 984
Rsquared 0.049 0.055 0.025 0.029 0.009 0.017 0.019 0.025
PanelC:PooledSamplewithSurvey-WaveFE
Zero-sumindex,0-1 0.188*** 0.184*** 0.085*** 0.080*** -0.066*** -0.066*** 0.151*** 0.146***
(0.024) (0.025) (0.026) (0.026) (0.017) (0.017) (0.034) (0.034)
Meandependentvariable 0.181 0.181 0.054 0.054 0.851 0.851 -0.797 -0.797
Std.dev.dependentvariable 0.172 0.172 0.165 0.165 0.135 0.135 0.252 0.252
Meanindependentvariable 0.194 0.194 0.194 0.194 0.194 0.194 0.194 0.194
Std.dev.independentvariable 0.205 0.205 0.205 0.205 0.205 0.205 0.205 0.205
Observations 1,188 1,188 1,181 1,181 1,181 1,181 1,181 1,181
Rsquared 0.180 0.188 0.232 0.249 0.126 0.137 0.251 0.267
DemographicControls Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
EthnicityFE N Y N Y N Y N Y
Notes: Thistableexaminestherelationshipbetweenzero-sumviewsandanindividual’sself-reportedenvyofothers,beliefsinwitchcraft,andbeliefsin
Christianity,forthesampleofabout200respondentscollectedin2015inKananga,DRC(panelA),thesampleofabout1,000respondentscollectedin2019in
Kananga,DRC(panelB),andthepooledsamplewithsurvey-wavefixedeffects(panelC).Itreportsestimatesofequation(8).Inallcolumns,theexplanatory
variableisthefirstprincipalcomponentofthesixzero-sumstatements.Incolumns1and2,thedependentvariablesarethefirstprincipalcomponentofthefour
surveyquestionsmeasuringself-reportedenvyofothers’success.Thefirstthreequestionsaskaboutexperiencingfrustrationwhenpeoplesucceedinlifeeasily,
resentmentwhenneighborsaresuccessful,orfeelingsofinjusticewhensomepeopleseemtohaveallthetalents.Thefourthquestionasksiftherespondent
sometimeswishesthatrichandpowerfulpeoplelosetheiradvantage.Incolumns3and4,thedependentvariablesaretheprincipal-component-basedmeasure
ofbeliefsinwitchcraftusingfoursurveyquestionsthataskaboutthestrengthofbeliefintraditionalreligion,frequencyofprayertoancestors,frequencyof
participationinritualsdevotedtoancestors,andhowclosetheyfeeltonon-ChristianswholiveinKananga. Incolumns5and6,thedependentvariables
aretheprincipal-component-basedmeasureofbeliefsinChristianityusingfoursurveyquestionsthataskaboutthestrengthofone’sbeliefintheChristian
God,frequencyofprayer,frequencyofattendingchurch,andhowclosetherespondentfeelstoChristianswholiveinKananga. Incolumns7and8,the
dependentvariablesarethedifferenceintheprincipal-component-basedmeasureofbeliefsinwitchcraftandChristianity. Weincludecontrolsforage,age
squared,gender,andtheirinteractionswithageandagesquaredinallcolumns.Evencolumnsalsoincludeethnicityfixedeffects.Coefficientsarereported
withrobuststandarderrorsinparentheses.***,**,and*indicatesignificanceatthe1,5,and10percentlevels.
decades across Africa, challenging yet coexisting alongside traditional religious beliefs (White,
2021
Muthukrishna and Norenzayan, ). Unlike traditional religions, Christianity teaches that
24

2013 25
everyone with faith can receive blessings from God (Norenzayan, ). Moreover, many
denominations promote versions of the gospel that encourage hard work and economic ambition
2008 2012
(Ranger and Ranger, , Freeman, ). Interestingly, the link between zero-sum perceptions
and Christianity is also found in Foster’s account of Tzintzuntzan, where an accepted source
1965 307
of income that did not generate envy was favors granted by saints (Foster, , p. ). We,
therefore, expect a negative relationship between zero-sum perceptions and the strength of
Christian beliefs. Our survey included questions about the strength of belief in the Christian
26
God, prayer frequency, church attendance, and feelings of closeness to Christians in Kananga.
In both samples, a more zero-sum view of the world correlates negatively with Christian beliefs
5 6
(columns and ). Since most individuals in this setting tend to hold Christian and traditional
beliefs simultaneously, we also examine the relative strength of such beliefs, measured as the
strength of witchcraft beliefs minus the strength of Christianity beliefs. We find that zero-sum
7
perceptions are associated with a stronger belief in witchcraft relative to Christianity (columns
8
and ).
Finally,weexaminewhetherthenatureofone’sbeliefswithinasinglereligionisalteredbythe
zero-sumnessoftheenvironment. ThisisparticularlyrelevantforChristianity,whichteachesthat
blessings from God ought to be non-zero-sum, i.e., available to all who are faithful. By contrast,
witchcraft beliefs in DRC do not have the same non-zero-sum logic. Examining blessings in
traditional religion, therefore, provides an interesting contrast. We estimate variants of equation
2
( )wheretheoutcomeofinterestisperceptionsofhowzero-sumblessingsarewithinChristianity
or traditional religion (full details provided in Appendix D.I). The zero-sum index is positively
associated with a more zero-sum view of Christian blessings; no such relationship exists within
4
traditional religion (Table D ). In other words, zero-sum perceptions are not only associated
with (i) weaker Christian beliefs (in absolute and relative terms), but also (ii) more zero-sum
perceptions of Christian blessings, even conditional on believing in Christianity in the first place.
25
Weempiricallyvalidatethisusingtwosurveyquestionsabouttheperceptionthatblessingsfrom“one’sancestors”
and“God”arelimited(seeAppendixS.IIfortheexactwordingofeachquestion). Respondentsweretwiceaslikely
tostronglyagreethatblessingsarenotlimitedwhenaskedabout“God”ratherthan“ancestors”(seeFigureE5). The
resultsalignwithqualitativeevidencefromfocusgroups,wheregainsfromwitchcraftwereoftendescribedaslimited,
comingattheexpenseofsomeone,andlikelytoinduceenvy. Incontrast,blessingsfromGodwereviewedasresulting
fromindividualdevotionandGod’sgrace,whichisabundant,doesnotcomeattheexpenseofothers,andislesslikely
toinduceenvy.
26
The survey questions and variable construction mimic those about traditional religious beliefs (i.e., witchcraft)
andarereportedinAppendixS.I.ThefactorloadingsarereportedinTableE10.
25

Robustness and Sensitivity Checks
As a robustness check, we calculate clustered standard errors assuming that the group k varies
across the intersection of neighborhoods and ethnicities (i.e., different ethnic groups in different
neighborhoods face varying levels of zero-sumness); neighborhood and gender (i.e., different
genders in different neighborhoods encounter distinct environments); and neighborhoods only
(i.e., different individuals in different neighborhoods face different environments). We also
produce randomization inference p-values, which do not assume any specific error structure.
11
These alternative approaches, summarized in Table E , lead to very similar standard errors
2
compared to our baseline (Table ).
We also test the assumption that relegating the effect of σ to the regression residuals does not
bias our estimates. To measure the extent of assortativity (σ), we use the degree of homophily
1000
in each respondent’s social network. In our , -person survey, we ask respondents to list
individualstheywouldgoto(orwhowouldcometothem)inninedifferentsituations,collecting
information about their links to these individuals. We then create five variables that measure
1
the fraction of connections listed that are for someone in the respondent’s: ( ) nuclear family,
2 3 4 5
( ) extended family, ( ) church, ( ) tribe, and ( ) religion. We create an aggregate measure of
27
homophily using the first principal component of the five measures. We also create a second
similar measure that uses the first principal component using the five variables, but measured as
the share of people (rather than connections) listed in each category. Using either measure, we
find that controlling for σ does not influence our estimated coefficients for zero-sum perceptions
14
(Table E ). The point estimates and statistical significance remain very similar.
Lastly, we also check how similar our estimates are when only one of the six zero-sum
15
measures is used. Estimates, reported in Table E for the pooled sample, show that in general,
we come to the same conclusion if any one zero-sum measure is used. The one exception
is the question that asks about trade, where the estimates for the religion outcomes become
underpowered. This may reflect the fact that most respondents in the sample may have limited
familiarity with trade.
27
DetailsaboutthesurveyquestionsareprovidedinAppendixS.IV,andthefactorloadingsforthefirstprincipal
componentarereportedinTableE13.
26

E. Experimental Evidence: Effects of a Zero-Sum Environment on Spiteful Behavior
To this point, our analysis has been purely correlational. We have presumed that the association
between the zero-sumness of a respondent’s environment and their demotivating beliefs reflects
the causal relationship. In this subsection, we study a lab experiment manipulating the zero-
sumness of each participant’s environment, which allows us to observe the causal effects of a
zero-sum environment on envy and spiteful behavior.
200
We invited a subset of individuals in the -person sample to make two visits to an experi-
124
mental lab. In all, individuals made both visits and participated in the following activities.
Participants arrived in (randomly assigned) groups of eight that were randomly assigned to
28
one of two treatments, which determined how they were allocated an initial endowment. In
the zero-sum treatment, participants took a French test, and their endowment was based on
15000
their relative ranking within the group. The highest-scoring participant received , CF, the
5000 500
second-highest received , CF, and the remaining participants received CF. In this arm,
endowments were zero-sum: only one participant could obtain the largest endowment. In the
non-zero-sum treatment, endowments were determined by drawing marbles from a basket with
6 500 5000
replacement. The basket contained grey marbles worth CF, one black marble worth ,
15000
CF, and one red marble worth , CF, giving all participants an equal ex-ante probability of
winning, independent of others’ outcomes. In this arm, endowments were not zero-sum: all
participants could obtain the largest endowment. The distribution of marbles was chosen to
balance the share of winners (and average endowments) across the two treatment arms.
An alternative design would be to select marbles in both cases – once with replacement (non-
zero-sum) and once without (zero-sum). However, this would diverge from Foster’s theory, in
which the image of limited good applies to effortful tasks but not necessarily to chance-based
ones. Asnoted,Fosterarguedthat“treasure”liesoutsidethezero-sumframework. Ifoneperson
discovers treasure, it does not negatively impact others. Thus, our priors were that selecting
marbles without replacement would be clearly seen as a non-zero-sum environment. (It is a
chance event that does not involve personal effort.) By contrast, the zero-sum arm aligns closely
with Foster’s ‘image of limited good’ setting since it involves effort that directly competes with
others’ to determine outcomes.
28 Ultimately,40groupshad8participants,and8groupshadonly7participants(becauseofno-shows).
27

To measure behaviors related to envy and spite, we administered the Joy of Destruction (JOD)
game. The game was designed to measure individuals’ willingness to harm others at a personal
2001
cost (Zizzo and Oswald, ). Each player went one at a time into a room with an enumerator
1000
and played several rounds of the game. In each round, participants received , CF and an
29
envelope containing a form to mark their decision on and a photo of the other player. When
the enumerator left the room, the participant chose among three options: (i) do nothing, (ii) pay
100 CF to increase the payoff of the other player by 500 CF, or (iii) pay 100 CF to decrease the
500
payoff of the other player by CF. Participants played the game in a random order against
five randomly selected other players from the group. This setup allows us to observe whether
individuals engage in costly, spiteful actions, particularly against those with high endowments.
While not needed to test the relationship between zero-sum and envy, the “increase” option
is important to have since otherwise the “decrease” option will tend to be chosen by individ-
uals who simply prefer doing something rather than nothing. The symmetric design of the
increase/decrease options helps ensure that choices to reduce others’ payoffs can be interpreted
as reflections of envy or spite. It also allows us to test whether a zero-sum environment affects
altruism towards the other player as well.
1
TheexperimentalresultsaresummarizedinFigure ,whichreportstheproportionofdecisions
2
made of each type (decrease, do nothing, increase) depending on whether player had won and
whethertheenvironmentwaszero-sumornot. Therawdatashowaclearpattern: whenmatched
with another player who won, participants were more likely to decrease the other player’s payoff
1
in the zero-sum arm but not in the non-zero-sum arm (Figure a). The zero-sum endowment
activity appears to cause a sizable share of participants to shift from doing nothing to decreasing
winners’ payoffs.
We also more formally test this relationship with the following equation:
IReduce = αIZeroSum+βIWinner+δIZeroSum×IWinner+X Γ+X Ω+ε , ( 9 )
ij ij j ij j i j ij
where i indexes participants and j their partner in the JOD. IReduce is an indicator that equals 1
ij
if player i (player 1 ) chose to reduce the payoff of player j (player 2 ). IZeroSum indicates whether
ij
players i and j were in the zero-sum treatment arm, and IWinner indicates whether player j was a
j
29
We implemented both a symmetric version of the game (where both players made decisions and this was
commonly known) and an asymmetric version where the other player did not make a decision about them. The
resultsforbothtypesaresimilar,sowepoolthemintheanalysisandincludeagame-typeindicatorvariable.
28

Figure 1: The Causal Effect of Zero-Sumness on Spiteful Behavior: Joy of Destruction Game –
Raw Data
(a)Decreaseplayer2’spayoff
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
egatnecreP
(b)Donothing
Non-ZS Environment 70
ZS Environment
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
P2 Not Winner P2 Winner
egatnecreP
(c)Increaseplayer2’spayoff
Non-ZS Environment 70
ZS Environment
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
P2 Not Winner P2 Winner
egatnecreP
Non-ZS Environment
ZS Environment
P2 Not Winner P2 Winner
Notes: Thefigurereportstheproportionofplayer1’sdecisions(increase, donothing, decrease)asafunctionoftheirendowment
treatment and whether player 2 was a winner, N = 733. The x-axis indicates whether player 2 was a winner or not. The bar
shadingindicatestheendowmenttreatment:i.e.,whethertheenvironmentwaszero-sumornot.Meansarereportedalongwith95%
confidenceintervals.
“winner” in the endowment activity (i.e., received 15 , 000 CF or 5 , 000 CF). The vector X contains
i
gender, age, age squared, and whether player i was a winner in the endowment activity, and X
j
includes gender, age, age squared, education, an indicator for having a salaried job, a continuous
30
measure of their success as perceived by anonymous others, an indicator for the two players
beingcoethnics,andanindicatorforthesymmetricversionofthegame(wherebothplayersknow
player 2 willfaceasymmetricdecisionaboutthem). Ourcoefficientofinterestisδ,whichreflects
whether winners are targeted more with spiteful behavior when the environment is zero-sum.
9 3
We estimate equation ( ) using OLS, and the results are presented in Table . In the non-zero-
sum environment, participants were not more likely to reduce the payoff of winners. However,
in the zero-sum environment, participants reduced the payoff of winners significantly more
often, even though they incurred a personal cost by doing so. Specifically, participants reduced
22 44
winners’ payoffs % of the time in the non-zero-sum treatment compared to % of the time in
22
the zero-sum treatment – a percentage point difference. The results are robust to including
1 2 2 3
controlsforcharacteristicsofplayer (column ),player (column ),andtheinteractionbetween
2 4
player and the randomly assigned zero-sumness of the environment (column ). The last
two specifications are important because winning a French test could signal status, creating
2
another potential motivation to reduce the payoff of player (beyond their zero-sum gain in
the endowment activity). Reassuringly, even when we control flexibly for the education level,
30
Specifically, duringhouseholdsurveysweaskedrespondentstoevaluatetheperceivedsuccessoftenrandomly
selectedanonymous(butreal)individualsbasedontheircharacteristics(sex,age,tribe,educationlevel,job,andtravel
history). Wethenestimatetherelationshipbetweensuccessandeachofthesecharacteristicsandusethecoefficients
topredicttheperceivedsuccessofeveryindividualinoursampleaccordingtotheircharacteristics.
29

Table 3: The Causal Effect of Zero-Sumness on Spiteful Behavior: Joy of Destruction Game – Full
Results
DependentVariable:
ChosetoDecreasePlayer2’sPayoff,0-1
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Player2isWinner -0.024 -0.056 -0.060 -0.061 0.004 0.004
(0.045) (0.046) (0.046) (0.046) (0.045) (0.045)
Player2isWinner×ZeroSum 0.224*** 0.224*** 0.266*** 0.232** 0.210** 0.180**
(0.081) (0.081) (0.088) (0.090) (0.086) (0.089)
ZeroSumEnvironment -0.008 -0.011 -0.022 -0.173 -0.015 -0.081
(0.055) (0.053) (0.054) (0.331) (0.079) (0.305)
Meandependentvariable(control) 0.22 0.22 0.22 0.22 0.22 0.22
Observations 733 733 733 733 733 733
Clusters(individuals) 124 124 124 124 124 124
Rsquared 0.023 0.063 0.074 0.078 0.465 0.467
Player1Controls N Y Y Y N N
Player1FE N N N N Y Y
Player2Controls N N Y Y Y Y
Player2Controls×ZeroSum N N N Y N Y
Notes:Thistableexamineshowrandomvariationinthezero-sumnessoftheendowmentcreationactivityshapesspitefulactionin
the“joyofdestruction”game.Thisgamewasadministeredatalabsettingin2015inKananga,DRC.Thetablereportsestimates
ofequation(9).Inallcolumns,thedependentvariableisanindicatorvariablethatequalsoneiftheparticipantchosetoreducethe
payoffoftheotherplayerby500CFatacostof100CF.Theexplanatoryvariablesareindicatorvariablesfor(i)whethertheplayer
2wasanykindofwinnerintheendowmentactivity,i.e.,received15,000CFor5,000CF,(ii)theendowmentactivitywaszero-sum,
and(iii)theinteractionofthetwo. AnobservationisaroundoftheJODgame,andaclusterisanindividualparticipantwho
completedbothlabvisits.Player1controlsincludegender,age,agesquared,andwhetherPlayer1wasawinnerintheendowment
activity. Player2controlsincludegender,age,agesquared,education,anindicatorforhavingasalariedjob,ameasureoftheir
successasperceivedbyanonymousothers,anindicatorforthesymmetricversionofthegame,andanindicatorforwhenthetwo
playersarecoethnics. Standarderrorsareclusteredattherespondentlevel. ***,**,and*indicatesignificanceatthe1,5,and10
percentlevels.
2
employment status, and perceived success level of player , there remains a large increase in the
2
probability of reducing player ’s payoff caused by the zero-sum endowment activity.
Given that participants made two lab visits with different endowment creation activities, our
most demanding specification includes individual fixed effects. The magnitude of the effect
remainslargeandstatisticallysignificant,withandwithoutplayer 2 characteristictimeszero-sum
5 6
interactions (columns and ). The estimates are also robust to estimating the results using a
multinomial logit with all three choice categories as the outcome (increase, reduce, do nothing)
5
with do nothing as the omitted category (Table E ). The estimates show, reassuringly, that while
a zero-sum environment affects the respondent’s decision to reduce the payoff of winners, which
we interpret as driven by jealousy, it does not affect the respondent’s decision to increase the
payoff of winners, a form of altruism outside of our model.
In all, the experimental results provide evidence that a zero-sum environment triggers envy
4
and spiteful behavior toward those who succeed. This is consistent with Proposition of the
model, which predicts a positive relationship between the zero-sumness of an environment and
the presence of demotivating beliefs.
30

F. Effects on Material Welfare
The model predicts that a more zero-sum environment, and the stronger demotivating beliefs
5 7
that it generates, will lower material welfare (Propositions and ). In DRC, these outcomes
exhibit little variation because most of the sample is living at or very near subsistence. They are
also difficult to measure because most workers do not earn a reliable wage. Nonetheless, for
completeness, we examine several proxies of material welfare, including education, employment,
0
and self-reported relative wealth. The education variable takes a value of if the respondent
1 2 3
never attended school, if they attended kindergarten, if they attended primary school, if
4
they attended secondary school, and if they attended university. The employment variable is
1
a binary variable that takes the value of if the respondent is employed. The perceived relative
1 5
wealth variable takes a value of to , corresponding to the step (i.e., quintile in the wealth
31
distribution) the respondent perceives they are on.
We examine an index based on the first principal component of education, employment,
6 5
and perceived relative wealth (Table E ). Consistent with Proposition , we observe a negative
1 2
relationship between zero-sum perceptions and material welfare (columns – ). Consistent with
7
Proposition , there is a large and statistically significant negative relationship between envy of
3 4
others’ success and well-being in both samples (columns – ), and between witchcraft belief and
5 6
well-beingisalsoalwaysnegative(columns – ). Formostrelationships,theestimatesareslightly
underpowered affecting significance in some specifications. However, despite being slightly
underpowered, the estimates are consistent with the predicted negative relationship between
32
zero-sum perceptions or demotivating beliefs and material welfare.
5. Global Evidence from the Integrated Values Surveys
4 7
The DRC samples allow us to empirically validate Propositions – , which concern the relation-
ships between the zero-sumness of the environment, demotivating beliefs, and material welfare
in a pre-industrial society comparable to the one Foster studied. However, because of the limited
2 3
cross-society variation, we could not test Propositions and , which require analyzing subsets
31 Theexactwordingofthequestionwas: “Imagine5steps, whereonthebottom, thefirststep, standthepoorest
people,andonthehigheststep,thefifthstep,standtherichest. Whichstepareyouontoday?” Respondentsarealso
shownavisualaidthatillustratesthesteps.
32
Estimates using each component of the index separately reveal that the signs of nearly all estimates are as
expected,althoughprecisiondecreasesslightly(TableE7).
31

Table4: Zero-SumPerceptions,DemotivatingBeliefs,andMaterialWelfareintheDRC
DependentVariable:PrincipalComponent-BasedMeasureof:
Education,Employment,andPerceivedRelativeWealth
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
PanelA:200PersonSample(2015)
Zero-sumindex,0-1 -0.044 -0.047
(0.058) (0.062)
Envyofothers’success,0-1 -0.125** -0.139**
(0.056) (0.057)
Witchcraftbeliefs,0-1 -0.184*** -0.200***
(0.039) (0.040)
Meanindependentvariable 0.372 0.315 0.315 0.315 0.217 0.217
Std.dev.independentvariable 0.191 0.191 0.193 0.193 0.255 0.255
Meandependentvariable 0.606 0.606 0.606 0.606 0.606 0.606
Std.dev.dependentvariable 0.173 0.173 0.172 0.172 0.173 0.173
Observations 205 205 224 224 217 217
Rsquared 0.203 0.239 0.239 0.279 0.286 0.324
PanelB:1,000PersonSample(2019)
Zero-sumindex,0-1 -0.054* -0.044
(0.029) (0.029)
Envyofothers’success,0-1 -0.178*** -0.161***
(0.034) (0.035)
Witchcraftbeliefs,0-1 -0.060 -0.054
(0.050) (0.050)
Meanindependentvariable 0.158 0.158 0.158 0.158 0.020 0.020
Std.dev.independentvariable 0.189 0.189 0.156 0.156 0.107 0.107
Meandependentvariable 0.540 0.539 0.539 0.539 0.539 0.539
Std.dev.dependentvariable 0.171 0.171 0.170 0.170 0.170 0.170
Observations 984 984 1,019 1,019 1,019 1,019
Rsquared 0.098 0.133 0.117 0.148 0.092 0.128
PanelC:PooledSamplewithSurvey-WaveFE
Zero-sumindex,0-1 -0.051* -0.048*
(0.026) (0.026)
Envyofothers’success,0-1 -0.164*** -0.153***
(0.029) (0.029)
Witchcraftbeliefs,0-1 -0.124*** -0.120***
(0.032) (0.033)
Meanindependentvariable 0.195 0.187 0.187 0.187 0.054 0.054
Std.dev.independentvariable 0.206 0.206 0.174 0.174 0.162 0.162
Meandependentvariable 0.551 0.551 0.551 0.551 0.551 0.551
Std.dev.dependentvariable 0.173 0.173 0.172 0.172 0.173 0.173
Observations 1,189 1,189 1,243 1,243 1,236 1,236
Rsquared 0.129 0.149 0.150 0.168 0.135 0.156
DemographicControls Y Y Y Y Y Y
EthnicityFE N Y N Y N Y
Notes:Thistableexaminestherelationshipbetweenzero-sumviews,envyofothers,witchcraftbeliefs,andmaterialwelfare
intwosamplesinKananga,DRC.Thedependentvariableisthefirstprincipalcomponentofeducation,employment,and
perceivedrelativewealthrelativetoothersinKananga.Thefirstexplanatoryvariableisthefirstprincipalcomponentof
thesixzero-sumstatements.ThesecondandthirdarethesamemeasuresofenvyandwitchcraftbeliefsstudiedinTable
2.Weincludecontrolsforage,agesquared,gender,anditsinteractionswithageandagesquaredinallcolumnsandfixed
effectsfortherespondent’sethnicityinevencolumns.Coefficientsarereportedwithrobuststandarderrorsinparentheses.
***,**,and*indicatesignificanceatthe1,5,and10percentlevels.
ofobservationsthatfacethesamezero-sumnessoftheirenvironmentandtestingforanon-linear
relationship between demotivating beliefs and material welfare and a monotonic relationship
between subjective well-being. We now turn to the global analysis which has sufficient data to
test all propositions. It also allows us to ask whether Foster’s insights hold more generally and
not only in small-scale pre-industrial societies.
32

A. Data
Wemeasurethezero-sumnessofaperson’senvironmentusingaquestionfromtheWorldValues
Survey (WVS) and European Values Study (EVS), which has a similar structure to our zero-sum
questions from the DRC. Respondents are given two opposing statements, one that is zero-sum
– “People can only get rich at the expense of others” – and the other positive sum – “Wealth
can grow so there’s enough for everyone.” The respondents are asked to report their views on a
ten-pointscalebetweenthetwoextremes. Wenormalizethevariabletoliebetweenzeroandone,
6
andincreaseinzero-sumness. FigureE ,whichreportsthedistributionofthezero-summeasure,
shows substantial variation in the extent to which individuals view wealth as zero-sum.
We begin by again validating that the measure reflects the true zero-sumness of individuals’
environments. Because economic stagnation results in a fixed pie and a more zero-sum envi-
ronment, we examine the relationship between respondents’ zero-sum perceptions and the rate
20 30
of economic growth in a respondent’s country during the first (or ) years of their life (see
Appendix C.III for full details). Conditional on country fixed effects, birth year fixed effects, and
demographic controls, lower economic growth is associated with a more zero-sum view of the
3
world (Table C ).
B. Zero-Sum Perceptions and Demotivating Beliefs
We first examine the relationship between zero-sum views and demotivating beliefs that reduce
4
effort,againmotivatedbyProposition ofthemodel. Demotivatingbeliefsdifferacrosscountries.
In some, they might take the form of beliefs in witchcraft or the evil eye. In others, a dislike for
greed and individual accumulation or a belief that hard work does not result in success. In
industrialized countries, the best proxies for θ are beliefs about the importance of hard work,
economic success, and individual achievement, which are available in the IVS.
We estimate the following equation:
Y = α +βZeroSum +X Γ+ε , ( 10 )
i,c,t c,t i,c,t i,c,t i,c,t
where i indices individuals, c country of residence, and t the year of the survey. ZeroSum is
i,c,t
our measure of zero-sum for individual i. α denote country by survey year fixed effects. Y
c,t i,c,t
denotes a measure of the strength in which person i holds a particular demotivating belief. The
33

vectorX includesthefollowingindividual-leveldemographiccontrols: agenderindicator,age,
i,c,t
age squared, and interactions between the gender and age measures.
We begin by considering beliefs about whether hard work brings success. Respondents report
1 10
their answers on a - integer scale. We reorder and normalize the variable so that zero equals
full agreement with “in the long run, hard work usually brings a better life,” and one equals full
33
agreementwith“hardworkdoesn’tgenerallybringsuccess.” Themeasurethusincreasesinthe
4
belief that hard work does not pay off. Consistent with Proposition , zero-sum perceptions are
5 1
associated with a stronger belief that hard work is unlikely to bring success (Table , column ).
We next look at two related measures that capture respondents’ views of whether low effort
explainswhysomepeoplearepoor. Thefirstsurveyquestionis: “Why,inyouropinion,arethere
people in this country who live in need?” We create a variable that takes on the value of zero
if they choose the answer “because of laziness and lack of willpower,” and the value of one if
theychoosetheanswer“becauseofanunfairsociety.” Thesecondmeasurecapturesviewsabout
whetherthepoorcanescapepovertythrougheffort: “Inyouropinion,domostpoorpeopleinthis
country have a chance of escaping from poverty, or is there very little chance of escaping?” We
create a variable that takes on the value of zero if the respondent chooses the answer “They have
a chance” and one if they choose “There is very little chance.” Thus, both questions measure the
belief that effort and hard work fail to explain economic success. Zero-sum views again correlate
2 3
with the belief that poverty does not arise from a lack of effort (columns and ).
We consider three additional demotivating beliefs. The first is the extent to which people
get disutility from asking others for money. In a setting where it is shameful to be helped
by others, individuals will try their hardest to provide for themselves. The survey question
asks respondents if they agree with the statement: “It is humiliating to receive money without
having to work for it” Respondents can choose “strongly agree,” “agree,” “neither,” “disagree,”
or “strongly disagree.” We normalize the measure to lie between zero and one and to increase
in the respondent’s disagreement with the statement. Again, the more zero-sum view of the
4
world is associated with feeling less humiliation from receiving money (column ). The last two
questions measure the perceived importance of achievement and work. The first question asks
whether it is important to be “very successful...to have people recognize one’s achievement.”
The second question asks respondents how important work is to them. Respondents choose
33
TheexactwordingofthisandallotherWVSandEVSvariablesusedinthepaperarereportedinAppendixS.VII.
34

Table5: Zero-SumPerceptionsandDemotivatingBeliefs
DependentVariable:DemotivatingBelief:
Humiliatingtoreceive
Hardworkbrings Peoplearepoor Peoplehaveachance Importanttometobe Howimportant
moneywithout
success, becauseoflaziness, toescapepoverty, successful, iswork,
workingforit,
0=fullyagreeto 0=agreeor 0=agreeor 0=verymuchto 0=veryimportant
0=stronglyagreeto
1=fullydisagree 1=disagree 1=disagree 1=notatall to1=notatall
1=stronglydisagree
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Zero-sumindex,0-1 0.118*** 0.077*** 0.121*** 0.023** 0.024*** 0.034***
(0.014) (0.013) (0.014) (0.010) (0.005) (0.004)
Meandependentvariable 0.367 0.697 0.602 0.352 0.391 0.163
Std.dev.dependentvariable 0.319 0.459 0.489 0.296 0.290 0.247
Meanindependentvariable 0.404 0.393 0.394 0.406 0.416 0.405
Std.dev.independentvariable 0.307 0.317 0.315 0.297 0.305 0.307
Observations 277,798 55,871 59,052 60,856 151,270 273,803
Clusters 99 50 49 47 78 99
Rsquared 0.117 0.125 0.178 0.096 0.171 0.116
DemographicControls Y Y Y Y Y Y
Wave-countryFE Y Y Y Y Y Y
Notes:ThetablereportsOLSestimatesthatarerelevantforProposition4ofthemodel.Anobservationisanindividual.Allspecificationsincludesurveywavebycountry
fixedeffects. Theindependentvariableisascalevariablerangingfromzerotoone,withonerepresenting“Peoplecanonlygetrichattheexpenseofothers,”andzero
representing“Wealthcangrowsothere’senoughforeveryone.”Thedependentvariablesarecategoricalvariablesappearingascolumnheads.Demographiccontrolsinclude
age,agesquared,gender,ageinteractedwithgender,andage-squaredinteractedwithgender.Coefficientsarereportedwithstandarderrorsclusteredatthelevelofcountry
inparentheses.***,**,and*indicatesignificanceatthe1,5,and10percentlevels.
responses ranging from “not at all important” to “very important.” Both measures are coded to
be decreasing in the importance placed on achievement and work – i.e., increasing in the extent
5 6
to which the beliefs are demotivating. The estimates, reported in columns and , show that
individuals with a more zero-sum worldview hold beliefs that place less importance on their
success and their work.
C. Zero-Sum Perceptions, Effort, and Economic Outcomes
5
We next consider Proposition , which predicts that zero-sum environments, by creating de-
motivating beliefs, will result in less effort and lower material welfare. We consider multiple
1 10
measures of material welfare. The first is self-reported income on a - integer scale. The
1 2 3
second is the respondent’s self-reported economic class: ( ) Lower class; ( ) Working class; ( )
4 5
Lower middle class; ( ) Upper middle class; and ( ) Upper class. The measure takes on the
reported integer values. The third is from a question about the net savings of the respondent’s
family. All three measures are normalized to lie between zero and one and to increase in
material welfare. Individuals with more zero-sum perceptions also have lower incomes, lower
6 1 3
self-reported socioeconomic class, and less savings (Table , columns – ). Consistent with the
model’s prediction, a more zero-sum environment is associated with lower material welfare.
We also examine education, an investment that requires effort but can enhance productivity.
35

Table6: Zero-SumPerceptionsandEconomicWelfare
DependentVariable:MeasuresofEconomicWelfare:
Cognitivevs.manual Supervisingsomeone
Incomedecile, Class, Familysavings, Educationalattainment,
worktasks, atwork,
0=bottomdecileto 0=lowerclassto 0=borrowedto 0=primaryschoolorless
0=manualto 0=noto
1=topdecile to1=upperclass 1=saved to1=universityormore
1=cognitive 1=yes
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Zero-sumindex,0-1 -0.038*** -0.045*** -0.032*** -0.030*** -0.049*** -0.046***
(0.005) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005) (0.007) (0.007)
Meandependentvariable 0.410 0.421 0.625 0.522 0.446 0.327
Std.dev.dependentvariable 0.258 0.245 0.309 0.337 0.346 0.469
Meanindependentvariable 0.403 0.409 0.406 0.405 0.416 0.415
Std.dev.independentvariable 0.306 0.307 0.308 0.309 0.301 0.302
Observations 256,944 207,165 203,716 219,524 116,885 119,888
Clusters 99 90 90 91 79 79
Rsquared 0.163 0.111 0.091 0.175 0.087 0.109
DemographicControls Y Y Y Y Y Y
Wave-countryFE Y Y Y Y Y Y
Notes:ThetablereportsOLSestimatesthatarerelevantforProposition5ofthemodelAnobservationisanindividual. Allspecificationsincludesurveywavebycountry
fixedeffects. Theindependentvariableisascalevariablerangingfromzerotoone,withonerepresenting“Peoplecanonlygetrichattheexpenseofothers,”andzero
representing“Wealthcangrowsothere’senoughforeveryone.”Thedependentvariablesarecategoricalvariablesappearingascolumnheads.Demographiccontrolsinclude
age,agesquared,gender,ageinteractedwithgender,andage-squaredinteractedwithgender.Coefficientsarereportedwithstandarderrorsclusteredatthelevelofcountry
inparentheses.***,**,and*indicatesignificanceatthe1,5,and10percentlevels.
Again, consistent with the model’s predictions, respondents who view the world as more zero-
4
sum have lower levels of education (column ). We also observe a similar negative association
withjobsthatrequireinvestmentsinhumancapitalaccumulation. Strongerzero-sumperceptions
are associated with being less likely to be employed in cognitively demanding occupations
5 6
(column ) and being less likely to supervise someone at work (column ).
Finally, we test the prediction from (i) of Proposition 7 : that demotivating beliefs should be
associated with lower material welfare. Consistent with the prediction, we almost universally
find a negative and statistically significant relationship between each of the six measures of
16 17
demotivating beliefs and measures of material welfare (Tables E and E ). More zero-sum
environments are associated with stronger demotivating beliefs and with lower material welfare,
and stronger demotivating beliefs are associated with lower material welfare.
D. Zero-Sum Perceptions, Demotivating Beliefs, and Happiness
6
Proposition predicts a negative relationship between the zero-sumness of an environment and
subjective well-being. We examine two measures of subjective well-being: “happiness” and “life
satisfaction.” The raw (binscatter) cross-individual relationship between zero-sum beliefs and
happiness or life satisfaction, conditional on country-by-survey-wave fixed effects, is reported in
7
Figure E . There is a clear negative relationship between viewing the world as zero-sum and
6 10
reportedhappinessandwell-being,inlinewithProposition . Estimatesofequation( )forboth
36

Table7: Zero-SumPerceptions,DemotivatingBeliefs,andSubjectiveWell-Being
Measureofdemotivatingbeliefsused:
Humiliatingtoreceive
Hardworkbrings Peoplearepoor Peoplehaveachance Importanttometobe Howimportant
moneywithout
success, becauseoflaziness, toescapepoverty, successful, iswork,
workingforit,
0=fullyagreeto 0=agreeor 0=agreeor 0=verymuchto 0=veryimportant
0=stronglyagreeto
1=fullydisagree 1=disagree 1=disagree 1=notatall to1=notatall
1=stronglydisagree
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
PanelA:Self-ReportedHappiness(0-1)asDependentVariable
Zero-sumindex,0-1 -0.051***
(0.004)
Demotivatingbelief,θ -0.047*** -0.045*** -0.043*** -0.022*** -0.045*** -0.046***
(0.004) (0.004) (0.004) (0.003) (0.004) (0.005)
Meandependentvariable 0.686 0.693 0.653 0.653 0.687 0.707 0.688
Std.dev.dependentvariable 0.247 0.245 0.255 0.254 0.237 0.244 0.243
Meanindependentvariable 0.404 0.370 0.701 0.599 0.366 0.394 0.169
Std.dev.independentvariable 0.307 0.321 0.458 0.490 0.299 0.292 0.251
Observations 276,913 381,232 62,055 64,833 261,518 156,835 610,474
Clusters 99 110 53 51 86 78 116
Rsquared 0.149 0.138 0.187 0.181 0.122 0.123 0.135
PanelB:SubjectiveLifeSatisfaction(1-10)asDependentVariable
Zero-sumindex,0-1 -0.641***
(0.039)
Demotivatingbelief,θ -0.482*** -0.620*** -0.549*** -0.239*** -0.522*** -0.340***
(0.040) (0.058) (0.058) (0.035) (0.061) (0.042)
Meandependentvariable 6.706 6.790 6.177 6.205 6.873 6.791 6.805
Std.dev.dependentvariable 2.360 2.338 2.626 2.600 2.336 2.278 2.370
Meanindependentvariable 0.405 0.371 0.705 0.600 0.367 0.395 0.169
Std.dev.independentvariable 0.307 0.321 0.456 0.490 0.299 0.292 0.251
Observations 277,456 382,023 60,594 64,415 263,495 157,059 615,058
Clusters 99 110 51 50 86 78 116
Rsquared 0.172 0.159 0.247 0.242 0.157 0.132 0.163
DemographicControls Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Wave-countryFE Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Notes:ThetablereportsOLSestimatesthatarerelevantforPropositions6and7ofthemodel.Thisistherelationshipbetweenzero-sumperceptionsordemotivatingbeliefs
andhappiness(panelA)orlifesatisfaction(panelB).Anobservationisanindividual.InpanelA,thedependentvariableishappiness,whichismeasuredbasedonascale
variablereportingrespondents’answerstothequestion“Takingallthingstogether,wouldyousayyouare,”withzeroindicating“Notatallhappy”andoneindicating“Very
happy.”InpanelB,thedependentvariableislifesatisfaction,whichismeasuredbasedonrespondents’answerstothequestion“Allthingsconsidered,howsatisfiedareyou
withyourlifeasawholethesedays?,”with1indicating“Completelydissatisfied”and10indicating“Completelysatisfied.”Theindependentvariablesareascaleranging
fromzerotoone,withonerepresenting“Peoplecanonlygetrichattheexpenseofothers,”andzerorepresenting“Wealthcangrowsothere’senoughforeveryone”(column
1),andcategoricalvariables,rangingfrom0,representingagreement,to1,indicatingdisagreementwiththesentence–exceptthesentence“Howimportantiswork,”where0
means“veryimportant”and1means“notatall”–(columns2–7).Allspecificationsincludecountry-wavefixedeffectsanddemographiccontrols(age,agesquared,gender,
ageinteractedwithgender,andage-squaredinteractedwithgender).Theestimatesreporteduseallavailabledata.TableE18reportsestimatesbutonlyusingobservations
thathaveanon-missingzero-summeasure,whichisrelevantfortheestimatesofcolumns2–7.***,**,and*indicatesignificanceatthe1,5,and10percentlevels.
measuresofwell-beingastheoutcomeconfirmthisnegativeandsignificantrelationshipbetween
7 1
zero-sum perceptions and life satisfaction (Table , column ).
We also explore the relationship between demotivating beliefs and subjective well-being.
7
Proposition predicts that subjective well-being should decrease in demotivating beliefs. Con-
sistent with this prediction, there is a negative relationship between each of the six measures of
7 2 7
demotivating beliefs and both measures of subjective well-being (Table , columns – ). More
zero-sum environments are associated with lower material welfare, subjective well-being, and
more demotivating beliefs. This induces a negative relationship between demotivating beliefs
34
and subjective well-being.
34
Thereportedestimatesuseallavailabledata. Ifonerestrictsthesampletoobservationsforwhichwealsohave
thezero-summeasure,thepatternsarequalitativelyidentical(TableE18).
37

E. Demotivating Beliefs and Economic Outcomes in a Fixed Zero-Sum Setting
While the preceding analysis focused on relationships across groups in environments of varying
zero-sumness (α), we now explore the strength of demotivating beliefs, material welfare, and
subjective well-being within a group k (with a fixed zero-sum environment).
Proposition 2 predicts an optimal strength of demotivating beliefs θ∗ within a group k in an
environment of zero-sumness α. Material welfare should be hump-shaped in the strength of
demotivating beliefs θ. To test this, we divide the sample into deciles based on respondents’
perceived zero-sumness. We interpret a decile as being analogous to a group k, with a fixed
level of α, in the model. To account for differences in language, gender, and age, we first net
out country-wave fixed effects and demographic controls before creating the zero-sum deciles.
Within each decile, we examine the relationship between demotivating beliefs and income levels.
We report estimates for the two measures of demotivating beliefs with the largest sample and
multiple possible responses – i.e., not just agree/disagree – and thus allow us to test for the
predicted hump-shaped relationship. The two questions are whether “hard work brings success”
(N = 254,693) and “how important is work” (N = 251,018). Figures 2 and 3 report the estimated
2
relationships between demotivating beliefs and income. Consistent with Proposition , we ob-
serve a hump-shaped relationship between demotivating beliefs and material welfare measured
by income for virtually all zero-sum deciles. We find similar results when we omit demographic
8 9
controls or country-wave fixed effects (Figures E and E ) and when using alternative measures
10 11 35
of demotivating beliefs only available in smaller samples (Figures E and E ).
3 1
By contrast, Proposition and the corresponding numerical results in Figure A predict that,
withinthegroup, subjectivewell-beingismaximizedbythetrue(non-demotivating)beliefθ = 0,
isstrictlyconvex,and(mostly)decreasingindemotivatingbeliefsforagivenzero-sumnessofthe
environment α. Figures E 12 and E 13 confirm that subjective well-being, measured by happiness,
is highest for the least demotivating belief and mostly decreasing in demotivating beliefs. We
obtain very similar estimates if we measure subjective well-being using life satisfaction (Figures
14 15
E and E ), omit demographic controls or country-wave fixed effects when creating the zero-
16 17
sumcategories(FiguresE andE ),orusealternativemeasuresofdemotivatingbeliefs(Figures
18 19
E and E ).
35
Wedonotreporttheestimatesforthetwodemotivatingbeliefquestions“Peoplehaveachancetoescapepoverty”
and“People arepoor becauseof laziness”because theyonly havetwopossible responses(agree ordisagree), which
preventsusfromtestingforahump-shapedrelationship.
38

Figure 2: Relationship Between Demotivating Beliefs (Work Is Not Important) and Income –
Holding Constant Zero-Sumness
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
emocnI
1st Zero-sum Decile
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Work is not important
emocnI
2nd Zero-sum Decile
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Work is not important
emocnI
3rd Zero-sum Decile
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Work is not important
emocnI
4th Zero-sum Decile
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Work is not important
emocnI
5th Zero-sum Decile
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Work is not important
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
emocnI
6th Zero-sum Decile
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Work is not important
emocnI
7th Zero-sum Decile
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Work is not important
emocnI
8th Zero-sum Decile
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Work is not important
emocnI
9th Zero-sum Decile
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Work is not important
emocnI
10th Zero-sum Decile
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Work is not important
Notes:ThefigurereportsestimatedrelationshipsrelevantforProposition2ofthemodel.Itshowstherelationshipbetweenrespondents’demotivatingbeliefsandlevelofincome
foreachzero-sumdecile.Alsoshownisafittedquadraticand95%confidenceintervals(basedonclusteringatthelevelofcountry)foreachpoint.Country-wavefixedeffects
anddemographiccontrolsarenettedoutbeforecreatingthezero-sumdeciles.Thedemotivatingbeliefinthisfigureisreportedbasedonrespondents’answerstotheversionof
thefollowingquestionthatasksaboutwork:“Foreachofthefollowing,indicatehowimportantitisinyourlife.Wouldyousayitis,”withtheoptions:“1Veryimportant,2
Ratherimportant,3Notveryimportant,4Notatallimportant.”Theseresponsesarerescaledtorangefromzeroandonetoachievethedemotivatingbeliefusedinthefigure
“Workisnotimportantatall.”(N=251,018).
Figure 3: Relationship Between Demotivating Beliefs (Hard Work Does Not Bring Success) and
Income – Holding Constant Zero-Sumness
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
.22
.18
emocnI
1st Zero-sum Decile
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
.22
.18
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Hard work does not bring success
emocnI
2nd Zero-sum Decile
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
.22
.18
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Hard work does not bring success
emocnI
3rd Zero-sum Decile
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
.22
.18
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Hard work does not bring success
emocnI
4th Zero-sum Decile
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
.22
.18
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Hard work does not bring success
emocnI
5th Zero-sum Decile
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Hard work does not bring success
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
.22
.18
emocnI
6th Zero-sum Decile
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
.22
.18
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Hard work does not bring success
emocnI
7th Zero-sum Decile
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
.22
.18
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Hard work does not bring success
emocnI
8th Zero-sum Decile
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
.22
.18
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Hard work does not bring success
emocnI
9th Zero-sum Decile
.5
.46
.42
.38
.34
.3
.26
.22
.18
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Hard work does not bring success
emocnI
10th Zero-sum Decile
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
Hard work does not bring success
Notes:ThefigurereportsestimatedrelationshipsrelevantforProposition2ofthemodel.Itshowstherelationshipbetweenrespondents’demotivatingbeliefsandlevelofincome
foreachzero-sumdecile.Alsoshownisafittedquadraticand95%confidenceintervals(basedonclusteringatthelevelofcountry)foreachpoint.Country-wavefixedeffects
anddemographiccontrolsarenettedoutbeforecreatingthezero-sumdeciles.Thedemotivatingbeliefinthisfigureisreportedbasedonhowmuchrespondentsagreewiththe
statement“Inthelongrun,hardworkusuallybringsabetterlife”onascaleofonetoten,withoneindicatingcompleteagreementwiththestatementandtenindicating“Hard
workdoesn’tgenerallybringsuccess–it’smoreamatterofluckandconnections.”Theseresponsesarerescaledtorangefromzeroandonetoachievethedemotivatingbelief
usedinthefigure“Hardworkdoesnotbringsuccess.”(N=254,693).
39

6. Conclusions
This paper studied the evolution of demotivating belief systems and their effect on economic
development. In an evolutionary model inspired by Foster’s “image of limited good,” we
showed that demotivating beliefs can spread in environments where economic interactions are
zero-sum. We also showed that the effects of zero-sum production are very different within
or across populations. Within a population, an intermediate demotivating belief can improve
material welfare by reducing excessive competition, but well-being decreases monotonically with
demotivating beliefs. Across populations, there is a positive relationship between zero-sumness
of the environment and demotivating beliefs, and both negatively affect material welfare and
subjective well-being.
We tested these theoretical predictions in the data. In two samples from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, respondents with a more zero-sum view of the world appear to hold
stronger demotivating beliefs, including envy of the success of others and witchcraft beliefs that
castsuccessassuspicious. Inalabexperiment,weprovidedcausalevidencethatamorezero-sum
environment causes more spiteful behavior toward more successful participants.
Turning to the global Integrated Values Survey sample, we checked the generality of our
findings from the DRC and also tested the model’s cross-societal predictions. We found a
robust positive relationship between perceived zero-sumness and demotivating beliefs, including
skepticism about the return to effort and the value of hard work. Also consistent with the model,
we found that zero-sum perceptions and the resulting demotivating beliefs are associated with
less happiness and lower life satisfaction. Lastly, we showed evidence of the divergence between
material welfare and subjective well-being predicted by the model. When holding the degree
of zero-sumness in the environment constant, income is hump-shaped in demotivating beliefs,
while happiness decreases with the strength of demotivating beliefs.
Thepaperleavesmanyimportantquestionsunansweredregardingtheevolutionofdemotivat-
ing belief systems and their interactions with economic development. Under what conditions do
zero-sum perceptions over- or under-estimate the true degree of rivalry in the environment? To
whatextentwastheGreatDivergencepartlytriggeredbyaculturalshiftinWesternEuropeaway
from demotivating belief systems that suppressed effort? Has the intensification of economic
rivalryandscarcityinthepastdecadeincreasedtheeffectivezero-sumnessoftheenvironmentin
40

many countries? If so, does this increase help explain the global increase in populism, nativism,
2022
and anti-elite sentiment (Guriev and Papaioannou, ), the turn away from meritocracy in the
2020
UnitedStates(Sandel, ), ortheriseofincelsindatingmarkets(Brooks,Russo-Batterhamand
2022
Blake, )? We view these questions as fertile ground for future work.
References
Akerlof, Robert, Niko Matouschek, and Luis Rayo, “Stories at Work,” AEA Papers and Proceedings, 2020,
110,199–204.
Alesina, Alberto, Sebastian Hohmann, Stelios Michalopoulos, and Elias Papaioannou, “Religion and
SocialMobilityinAfrica,”Nature,2023,618,134–143.
Algan, Yann and Pierre Cahuc, “Inherited Trust and Growth,” American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (5),
2060–2092.
Alger, Ingela and Jörgen W Weibull, “A generalization of Hamilton’s rule-Love others how much?,”
JournalofTheoreticalBiology,2012,299,42–54.
and Jörgen W. Weibull, “Homo Moralis–Preference Evolution under Incomplete Information and
AssortativeMatching,”Econometrica,2013,81(6),2269–2302.
and ,“EvolutionandKantianMorality,”GamesandEconomicBehavior,2016,98,56–67.
Becker,GaryS.,“Altruism,Egoism,andGeneticFitness: EconomicsandSociobiology,”JournalofEconomic
Literature,1976,14(3),817–826.
Becker, Sascha O. and Ludger Woessmann, “Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital Theory of Protestant
EconomicHistory,”QuarterlyJournalofEconomics,2009,124(2),531–596.
Bénabou,RolandandJeanTirole,“BeliefinaJustWorldandRedistributivePolitics,”QuarterlyJournalof
Economics,2006,121(2),699–746.
Bisin,AlbertoandThierryVerdier,“”Beyondthemeltingpot”: CulturalTransmission,Marriage,andthe
EvolutionofEthnicandReligiousTraits,”QuarterlyJournalofEconomics,2000,115(3),955–988.
and ,“OntheJointDynamicsofCultureandInstitutions,”2017. NBERWorkingpaperNo.23375.
Bowles,SamuelS.,“GroupCompetition,ReproductiveLeveling,andtheEvolutionofHumanAltruism,”
Science,2006,314(5805),1569–1572.
Brooks, Robert C., Daniel Russo-Batterham, and Khandis R. Blake, “Incel Activity on Social Media
LinkedtoLocalMatingEcology,”PsychologicalScience,2022,33(2),249–258.
Buggle, Johannes C. and Ruben Durante, “Climate Risk, Cooperation and the Co-Evolution of Culture
andInstitutions,”EconomicJournal,012021,131(637),1947–1987.
Carvalho,Jean-Paul,“Veiling,”QuarterlyJournalofEconomics,2013,128(1),337–370.
Cavalli-Sforza, Luigi Luca and Marcus W. Feldman, Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A Quantitative
Approach,Princeton: PrincetonUniversityPress,1981.
Chinoy, Sahil, Nathan Nunn, Sandra Sequeira, and Stefanie Stantcheva, “Zero-Sum Thinking and the
RootsofU.S.PoliticalDifferences,”forthcoming. AmericanEconomicReview.
Ely, Jeffrey C. and Okan Yilankaya, “Nash Equilibrium and the Evolution of Preferences,” Journal of
EconomicTheory,2001,97(2),255–272.
Enke, Benjamin, “Kinship, Cooperation, and the Evolution of Moral Systems,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics,2019,134(2),953–1019.
Esponda,IgnacioandDemianPouzo,“Berk–NashEquilibrium: AFrameworkforModelingAgentswith
MisspecifiedModels,”Econometrica,2016,84(3),1093–1130.
41

Fernandez,Raquel,“Women,WorkandCulture,”JournaloftheEuropeanEconomicAssociation,2007,5(2–3),
305–332.
Fernández, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli, “Culture: An empirical investigation of beliefs, work, and
fertility,”AmericanEconomicJournal: Macroeconomics,2009,1(1),146–177.
Flouri,Eirini,“AnIntegratedModelofConsumerMaterialism: CanEconomicSocializationandMaternal
ValuesPredictMaterialisticAttitudesinAdolescents?,”JournalofSocio-Economics,1999,28(6),707–724.
Foster,GeorgeM.,TraditionalCultures,andtheImpactofTechnologicalChange,NewYork: Harper,1962.
,“PeasantSocietyandtheImageofLimitedGood,”AmericanAnthropologist,1965,67(2),293–315.
,Tzintzuntzan;MexicanPeasantsinaChangingWorld,NewYork: LittleBrown&Company,1967.
,“ASecondLookatLimitedGood,”AnthropologicalQuarterly,1972,45(2),57–64.
Frank, Robert H., “If Homo Economicus Could Choose his Own Utility Function, Would he Want One
withaConscience?,”AmericanEconomicReview,1987,pp.593–604.
, Passions Within Reason: The Strategic Role of the Emotions, New York and London: WW Norton & Co,
1988.
Freeman, Dena, Pentecostalism and Development: Churches, NGOs and Social Change in Africa, Palgrave
Macmillan,2012.
Gale, David and Lloyd S Shapley, “College admissions and the stability of marriage,” The American
MathematicalMonthly,1962,69(1),9–15.
Gershman,Boris,“TheTwoSidesofEnvy,”JournalofEconomicGrowth,2014,19(4),407–438.
, “The Economic Origins of the Evil Eye Belief,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2015, 110,
119–144.
,“WitchcraftBeliefsandtheErosionofSocialCapital: EvidencefromSub-SaharanAfricaandbeyond,”
JournalofDevelopmentEconomics,2016,120,182–208.
, “Witchcraft Beliefs as a Cultural Legacy of the Atlantic Slave Trade: Evidence from Two Continents,”
EuropeanEconomicReview,2020,122(3),103362.
, “Witchcraft Beliefs Around the World: An Exploratory Analysis,” PLoSONE, November 2022, 17 (11),
e0276872.
, “Witchcraft Beliefs, Social Relations, and Development,” Handbook of Labor, Human Resources and
PopulationEconomics,2022,pp.1–30.
,“WitchcraftBeliefsandSubjectiveWell-Being,”2023. Workingpaper,AmericanUniversity.
Giuliano, Paola, “Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin Matter?,” Journal of the
EuropeanEconomicAssociation,2007,5(5),927–952.
andNathanNunn,“UnderstandingCulturalPersistenceandChange,”ReviewofEconomicStudies,2021,
88(4),1541–1581.
Grosjean, Pauline and Rishabh Khattar, “It’s Raining Men! Hallelujah? The Long-Run Consequences of
Male-BiasedSexRatios,”ReviewofEconomicStudies,2018,86(2),723–754.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange,” Quarterly
JournalofEconomics,2009,124(3),1095–1131.
, , and , “Long-Term Persistence,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2016, 14 (6), 1401–
1436.
Guriev,SergeiandEliasPapaioannou,“ThePoliticalEconomyofPopulism,”JournalofEconomicLiterature,
September2022,60(3),753–832.
Güth, W. and M. Yaari, “An Evolutionary Approach to Explain Reciprocal Behavior in a Simple Strategic
Game,” in U. Witt, ed., Explaining Process and Change—Approaches to Evolutionary Economics, University
ofMichiganPress,1992.
Heifetz, Aviad, Chris Shannon, and Yossi Spiegel, “What to Maximize if You Must,” Journal ofEconomic
Theory,2007,133(1),31–57.
Henrich, Joseph, “The Evolution of Innovation-Enhancing Institutions,” in Stephen J. Shennan and
42

Michael J. O’Brien, eds., Innovation in Cultural Systems: Contributions in Evolutionary Anthropology, MIT
Press,2009,pp.99–120.
,“HumanCooperation: TheHunter-GathererPuzzle,”CurrentBiology,102018,28(19),R1143–R1145.
Mansour,SelimaBen,ElyèsJouini,andClotildeNapp,“Istherea“pessimistic”biasinindividualbeliefs?
Evidencefromasimplesurvey,”TheoryandDecision,2006,61(4),345–362.
Massari, Filippo and Jonathan Newton, “Learning and Equilibrium in Misspecified Models,” 2020.
Workingpaper.
McClelland,DavidC.,TheAchievingSociety,NewYork: D.VanNostrandCompany,1961.
McCloskey, Deirdre Nansen, Bourgeois Dignity: Why Economics Can’t Explain the Modern World, Chicago:
UniversityofChicagoPress,2010.
Norenzayan, Ara, Big Gods: How Religion Transformed Cooperation and Conflict, Princeton University Press,
2013.
Nunn, Nathan and Leonard Wantchekon, “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa,”
AmericanEconomicReview,2011,101(7),3221–3252.
and Raul Sanchez de la Sierra, “Why Being Wrong Can Be Right: Magical Warfare Technologies and
thePersistenceofFalseBeliefs,”AmericanEconomicReviewPapers&Proceedings,2017,107(5),582–687.
Ok,EfeA.andFernandoVega-Redondo,“OntheEvolutionofIndividualisticPreferences: AnIncomplete
InformationScenario,”JournalofEconomicTheory,2001,97(2),231–254.
Platteau,Jean-Philippe,Institutions,SocialNorms,andEconomicDevelopment,Vol.1,PsychologyPress,2000.
Ranger, Terence O. and T. O. Ranger, Evangelical Christianity and Democracy in Africa, Oxford University
Press,2008.
Sandel,MichaelJ.,TheTyrannyofMerit: What’sBecomeoftheCommonGood?,PenguinUK,2020.
Sandholm,WilliamH.,PopulationGamesandEvolutionaryDynamics,Cambridge: MITpress,2010.
Schelling,ThomasC.,TheStrategyofConflict,Cambridge: HarvardUniversityPress,1960.
Schulz, Jonathan F., Duman Bahrami-Rad, Jonathan P. Beauchamp, and Joseph Henrich, “The Church,
IntensiveKinship,andGlobalPsychologicalVariation,”Science,2019,366(6466),eaau5141.
Smith, Kristopher M, Tomás Larroucau, Ibrahim A Mabulla, and Coren L Apicella, “Hunter-gatherers
maintain assortativity in cooperation despite high levels of residential change and mixing,” Current
Biology,2018,28(19),3152–3157.
Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg, “The Diffusion of Development,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2009,124(2),469–529.
Voigtländer, Nico and Hans-Joachim Voth, “Persecution perpetuated: The Medieval Origins of Anti-
SemiticViolenceinNaziGermany,”QuarterlyJournalofEconomics,2012,127(3),1339–1392.
Whelan,ChristopherT.,“Marginalization,Deprivation,andFatalismintheRepublicofIreland: Classand
UnderclassPerspectives,”EuropeanSociologicalReview,1996,12(1),33–51.
White, Cindel J. M., Michael Muthukrishna, and Ara Norenzayan, “Cultural Similarity among Coreli-
gionists within and between Countries,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2021, 118 (37),
e2109650118.
Zizzo, Daniel John and Andrew J. Oswald, “Are People Willing to Pay to Reduce Others’ Incomes?,”
Annalesd’ÉconomieetdeStatistique,2001,63-64,39–65.
43