Cognition218(2022)104941
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Cognition
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cognit
Full Length Article
Population ethical intuitions
Lucius Caviolaa,*, David Althausb, Andreas L. Mogensenc, Geoffrey P. Goodwind
aDepartment of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United States of America
bCenter on Long-Term Risk, London, United Kingdom
cGlobal Priorities Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
dDepartment of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States of America
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: Is humanity's existence worthwhile? If so, where should the human species be headed in the future? In part, the
Happiness answers to these questions require us to morally evaluate the (potential) human population in terms of its size
Suffering and aggregate welfare. This assessment lies at the heart of population ethics. Our investigation across nine ex-
Moral judgment periments (N =5776) aimed to answer three questions about how people aggregate welfare across individuals:
Population ethics
(1) Do they weigh happiness and suffering symmetrically?; (2) Do they focus more on the average or total welfare
Axiology
of a given population?; and (3) Do they account only for currently existing lives, or also lives that could yet exist?
We found that, first, participants believed that more happy than unhappy people were needed in order for the
whole population to be net positive (Studies 1a-c). Second, participants had a preference both for populations
with greater total welfare and populations with greater average welfare (Study 3a-d). Their focus on average
welfare even led them (remarkably) to judge it preferable to add new suffering people to an already miserable
world, as long as this increased average welfare. But, when prompted to reflect, participants' preference for the
population with the better total welfare became stronger. Third, participants did not consider the creation of new
people as morally neutral. Instead, they viewed it as good to create new happy people and as bad to create new
unhappy people (Studies 2a-b). Our findings have implications for moral psychology, philosophy and global
priority setting.
Imagine a world containing 2.5 billion people, out of which 1.5 1. Approaches to population ethics
billion live unhappy lives and 1 billion live happy lives.1 Now imagine
that forty years later this world contains over 5 billion people, out of Population ethics deals with questions that arise when the compo-
which 2 billion live unhappy lives and 3 billion live happy lives. sition or size of the population varies across different outcomes, e.g.,
Focusing just on the number of happy and unhappy people and setting when one or more additional people (with different identities) could be
aside other considerations, has the world improved or not? This is a born (Greaves, 2017). The current paradigm in population ethics was
question of population ethics. In this paper, we investigate lay people's established by the philosopher Derek Parfit in his 1984 book Reasons and
population ethical intuitions.2 Persons. Even though population ethics is a relatively young field, it is
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: lucius.caviola@gmail.com (L. Caviola).
1 These numbers roughly reflect the overall human population sizes and the number of people living in extreme global poverty vs. not living in extreme global
poverty in 1950 and 1990 respectively (Roser & Ortiz-Ospina, 2020). Of course, it is by no means the case that all people living in extreme poverty live unhappy lives
and all people not living in extreme poverty live happy lives (e.g., Biswas-Diener & Diener, 2009; Diener & Diener, 1996; Diener, Oishi, & Tay, 2018). Note also that
since 1990 the number of people living in global poverty has more than halved to 734 million and the total human population size has increased to 7.8 billion in
2020.
2 Philosophers disagree on the nature and role of intuitions in philosophy. In one conception, intuitions in philosophy are just beliefs. Lewis (1983, p. x) famously
writes: “Our ‘intuitions’ are simply opinions; our philosophical theories are the same.” However, many philosophers wish to understand intuitions as something
different from and prior to belief (Bealer, 1998; Huemer, 2005; Chudnoff, 2013). Others, like Cappellen (2012), are skeptical of the significance of ‘intuition’-talk in
philosophy. By and large, our studies merely ask subjects to report their beliefs. It seems to us reasonable to suppose that the beliefs reported will typically have arisen
unreflectively as a result of certain claims appearing to our subjects as correct, but the studies we report cannot speak to views that distinguish between people's
beliefs and their intuitions, with the plausible exception of the thinking-style manipulations in 3c and 3d.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2021.104941
Received 10 April 2021; Received in revised form 9 October 2021; Accepted 11 October 2021
Availableonline5November2021
0010-0277/©2021ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
highly relevant today and has direct implications for decision-making. It the world is better 40 years later when 2 billion unhappy lives and 3
is especially relevant to policy questions regarding humanity's inter- billion happy lives exist because the total amount of happiness out-
mediate and long-term future, including those related to population weighs the total amount of suffering. Negative utilitarianism, in contrast,
growth and control, as well as to factors that could increase or decrease weighs suffering more than happiness. Strict negative utilitarianism is
the risk of human extinction (Bostrom, 2013; Greaves et al., 2020). Also the view on which one population is better than another if and only if it
relevant are questions of individual decision making, such as whether to contains a smaller total of suffering, without taking into account the
have children or not. amount of happiness. This means that according to strict negative util-
While population ethics is a broad field, in this paper we will focus on itarianism the world in our example becomes worse when the number of
how people evaluate world states that differ in the number of happy and people with unhappy lives increases to 2 billion. To the best of our
unhappy people they contain — that is, in terms of the welfare of their knowledge, no existing research has examined whether ordinary in-
constituent members. To evaluate a pair of world states (or populations), dividuals' views align more closely with classical or negative utilitarian
one needs to order them in terms of their aggregate well-being, in order theories. Accordingly, our first aim was to address this question for
to determine which world has the higher aggregate well-being. How- populations that were described as already existing.
ever, this is by no means a straightforward task. In fact, it generates a
series of deeply complex subsidiary questions that lie at the heart of 3. Averagism vs. totalism
population ethics, and that comprise the topic of our present research.
One question is whether, in aggregating welfare, happiness and A second key normative question concerns whether one should
suffering should be weighed equally (or symmetrically). A second evaluate populations based on their average level of happiness or their
question is whether one should consider the average or total level of total sum of happiness (Sidgwick, 1981, p. xxxvi), or both. The first view
well-being of the population. And a third question is whether the overall is referred to as averagism. The second view is referred to as totalism. The
value of a population should be thought about only in terms of people contrast between these views represents an important schism within
who actually exist, or whether it should also account for people who moral philosophy. According to averagism, a world is better if it contains
could exist. Though distinct, these questions all trace back to the same a small population of people that are on average extremely happy than a
central theme — how we should aggregate welfare (or well-being) when much larger population that is on average very slightly less happy. Ac-
deciding whether a given population is better or worse than another. cording to totalism, the second world would be better.
Resolving which of these theories is correct has proved to be an
2. Weighing happiness against suffering especially difficult philosophical problem because both lead to conclu-
sions that many would consider unacceptable. For example, according to
Our first research question is how people weigh and trade happiness averagism, a world with 10 extremely unhappy people could be
(i.e., positive welfare) and suffering (i.e., negative welfare) in evaluating improved by adding an 11th unhappy person, as long as this person is
populations. Do people think that a greater number of happy people is slightly less unhappy than the current average, thereby increasing the
required to outweigh a certain amount of unhappy people in order for a average happiness level of the population. Because of these and other
population to be net positive? Although at first blush, it may seem counterintuitive implications (cf. Greaves, 2017) moral philosophers
intuitive to weigh happiness and suffering equally, there is also a strong tend to reject averagism. Despite this, averagism has been endorsed by
pull towards weighing suffering more than happiness, as we describe several prominent researchers, such as Hardin (1968) in ‘The Tragedy of
presently. the Commons’.
In addressing this issue, we focus on whether people's intuitions align Totalism can also lead to conclusions that many consider counter-
with the verdicts of different utilitarian theories (or utilitarian population intuitive. The most famous example is the so-called Repugnant
axiologies). We focus on theories that rank variable population outcomes Conclusion formulated by Parfit (1984): according to totalism, a popu-
in virtue of the happiness and suffering experienced by the people in lation of perfectly happy people would be less good than a world with an
those outcomes (i.e., hedonistic welfarist theories). This point of de- enormous number of people whose lives are barely worth living and
parture seemed reasonable to us, because even if some (or many) people thereby just slightly positive. If the number of people in the second
are not utilitarians, most people presumably value certain states of the world is large enough, the total amount of happiness will be larger than
world more than others and do so in ways that take into account the that of the first world.
happiness and suffering contained in these world states when evaluating How to make philosophical progress on this issue is not obvious.
them. For example, a world filled with happiness is presumably Indeed, it may be that no way exists to jointly preserve the strong in-
considered as better than a world filled with suffering. In that sense, tuitions that underlie each of these approaches (Greaves, 2017). Yet, this
many people plausibly hold certain broadly utilitarian axiological does not absolve us of the need to make judgments of the relative values
intuitions.3 of different populations, nor of the need to make policy choices between
Utilitarian theories differ in how they weigh happiness and suffering them. The second aim of our investigation was to determine whether
in populations with varying sizes. Classical utilitarianism is symmetrical ordinary individuals' intuitions more typically align with averagist or
in that it weighs happiness and suffering the same. With respect to the totalist theories, or some blend of the two.
example we introduced at the beginning of this paper, this suggests that
4. The intuition of neutrality and the asymmetry
One consequence of totalist views is that adding a new person to a
3 This of course does not mean that people are utilitarians. First, many people world is a good thing, as long as the new person's well-being is higher
are likely not pure welfarists. They also value other things in addition to than neutral (Greaves, 2017). And, since adding a new happy person is a
happiness and suffering (or other factors that contribute to good or bad lives), good thing, then it might seem to follow that we have a moral obligation
such as knowledge, beauty or complexity. But we limit our research to welfarist
to create new happy people. This same consequence is also implied by
aspects. Second, we know from previous research that in their ethical decision-
averagist theories in cases where the new person's happiness exceeds the
making (i.e., deontics as opposed to axiology) people often follow deontological
population average. The reason for this is that the respective utilitarian
constraints that prohibit them from bringing about the utilitarian outcome (e.g.,
the footbridge trolley dilemma, Greene, Sommerville, Nystrom, Darley, & theories (totalist and averagist) take into account the happiness and
Cohen, 2001). That is, even if people consider one world state better than suffering of future people who do not exist yet but could exist in the
another, they might still not consider it morally required or permissible to future.
actively choose the option that leads to that world state. However, this consequence has not appealed to many philosophers.
2

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
Narveson (1973: 80) famously writes: “We are in favor of making people many more highly moral acts is still considered immoral (Riskey &
happy, but neutral about making happy people.” The latter part of this Birnbaum, 1974).
slogan has been called the intuition of neutrality (Broome, 2005). While Other research provides mixed evidence regarding the application of
the view that creating additional happy lives is neutral is generally negativity bias to moral judgments. In a variation of the one-shot
considered intuitive by moral philosophers, the same cannot be said for dictator game, Tappin and Capraro (2018) found that the preference
the view that there is nothing bad about adding lives in which suffering to “do good” was as strong as the preference to “avoid bad”, suggesting
predominates. According to the asymmetry, the addition of people with that negativity bias does not affect moral judgment in that context. Most
happy lives to the population is intrinsically neutral, whereas the directly relevant to our research question is a pilot study (N =14) by
addition of people with unhappy lives to the population is intrinsically Rozin and Royzman (2001, p. 307), in which participants were asked to
bad (McMahan, 1981).4 Our interest was in whether people accept the imagine that they could press a button that would give one minute of
intuition of neutrality, and whether their views align with the asym- “intense pain” to one person and, in version A, 10 min of “similarly
metry. Do they regard the addition of suffering people as worse to a intense pleasure to another person or, in version B, one minute of
greater extent than the addition of happy people is good? “similarly intense pleasure” to 10 other people. Every participant
Because this last question relates to our first question (on the refused to press the button. The participants were then asked to state the
weighing of happiness and suffering), we order the sequence of our minimum number of minutes (version A) or people (version B) that
investigation as follows: In our first studies, we examine how people would make them press the button. In version A, the lowest number was
weigh happiness and suffering for existing populations — do they do so 800 min, and in version B, all participants except one stated that no
symmetrically, or asymmetrically? In our next studies, we examine how number would be large enough. These findings suggest that people
people evaluate the addition of new people. Do they regard the addition consider suffering to be much worse than happiness is good. This study,
of happy people as good and the addition of suffering people as bad? If however, comprised only 14 participants, and it also concerned people's
so, do they do so symmetrically, or asymmetrically? Our final set of hypothetical behavioral intentions—what they themselves would be
studies examine whether people typically hold totalist or averagist in- willing to do—whereas our focus is on more basic value judgments
tuitions. In addressing these questions, we hoped to make systematic about which states of the world are better or worse (referred to in phi-
progress in revealing the way people think about the aggregation of losophy as “axiological judgments”), regardless of people's willingness
population well-being, and thereby, the way they think about popula- to bring about those states of the world.
tion ethics. The economist Spears (2019) examined people's intuitions regarding
the asymmetry. Participants were presented with a scenario about a
5. Previous psychological research couple considering whether to have another child. Participants were
asked to rate whether the hypothetical facts that the child's life would
To our knowledge there exists almost no published psychological either be full of suffering or full of happiness were morally relevant to
research on population ethical intuitions. In most previous research on the couple's decision. Nearly 75% of participants thought that both facts
moral judgment and decision making, population sizes were usually not are morally relevant. Only 15% of participants supported a strict
systematically varied. However, psychological research on related asymmetry and thought that only the fact about suffering but not the
topics, as well as research in other fields (e.g., economics), is informative fact about happiness was morally relevant. This could be seen as evi-
for our research questions. dence that most people do not endorse the asymmetry, at least in its
As for our first research question of how people trade happiness strict form. However, the study's approach was rather indirect since it
against suffering, existing research on negativity bias could be relevant did not directly ask participants how good or bad they would consider it
(for reviews, see Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Finkenauer, & Vohs, 2001; if a happy or unhappy child were to be born, so it is possible that par-
Rozin & Royzman, 2001). Negativity bias refers to the phenomenon that ticipants would have endorsed a more moderate version of the asym-
negative events (e.g., losing money or having bad social interactions) metry, according to which suffering is worse than happiness is good.
have a greater impact on our behavior, cognition, and emotions than do As for our second research question of whether people focus on the
positive events (e.g., gaining money or having good social interactions). average or total amount of happiness, there is no directly relevant
Negativity bias has been observed in numerous domains, including research published in psychological journals. Nonetheless, some rele-
financial decision-making (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979, 1984), vant research exists.
impression formation (e.g., Peeters & Czapinski, 1990), affective pro- One investigation was conducted by Starmans & Bloom, 2015. In one
cessing (e.g., Ito, Larsen, Smith, & Cacioppo, 1998), and social inter- study, the authors presented participants with a “happiness scale”
action (e.g., Fiore, Becker, & Coppel, 1983; Manne, Taylor, Dougherty, ranging from 1 (very sad) to 5 (very happy). They found that partici-
& Kemeny, 1997). However, there exists less research on negativity bias pants' normative judgments about distributions of happiness across
in the moral domain. One exception is the finding that immoral be- different people in a population (i.e., inter-individual) were similar to
haviors have a greater influence on moral character evaluation than do their normative judgments about distributions of happiness within the
moral behaviors (Birnbaum, 1972, 1973; Riskey & Birnbaum, 1974). For lifetime of one individual (i.e., intra-individual). The authors also found
example, a person who has committed two highly immoral acts but that the vast majority of participants preferred one person on happiness
level 5 to 15 people on happiness level 1. It is unclear, though, whether
this finding provides evidence for the claim that participants followed
4 One way to derive the intuition of neutrality is by assuming a person- averagism—a possible explanation considered by the authors. Instead, it
affecting axiology (cf. Bader, 2021; Parfit, 1984; Greaves, 2017; Beckstead, is plausible that participants interpreted level 1 (very sad) as negative
2013; McMahan, 1981; Arrhenius, 2000), according to which one outcome is welfare in which case their preferences would be consistent with both
better (worse) than another only if it is better (worse) for someone. If we deny totalism and averagism.
existence comparativism and maintain that one outcome is better (worse) than Another relevant set of studies was conducted by Spears (2017). In
another for someone only if that person exists in both outcomes (Broome,
the first three studies, participants chose between smaller populations
2004), then the intuition of neutrality follows. It is possible to derive the
with higher average incomes and larger populations with lower average
asymmetry given a person-affecting axiology if one accepts asymmetric com-
incomes. Participants valued both increased population size as well as
parativism, which says that a person cannot be better off as a result of being
increased average income, suggesting a focus on both total and average
brought into existence with a good life, as opposed to never existing, but can be
worse off as a result of being brought into existence with a bad life, as opposed welfare. One important limitation of these studies is that they focused on
to never existing. As demonstrated by Nebel (2019), asymmetric comparativism different levels of income and not happiness directly. It is unclear how
is significantly more defensible than may be immediately apparent. happy or unhappy participants perceived the people with different
3

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
income levels to be. population ethical judgments, i.e., their moral evaluation of pop-
In another study within the same economics paper, participants ulations. We measure axiological judgments in different ways. One way
ranked six different populations consisting of either “10 billion” or is to ask participants to directly assess the overall value of a population
“many more” people, leading either “bad”, “good” or “excellent lives”. in absolute terms, where a population has a net positive value if one
Participants were allowed to be indifferent between options. 46% of thinks it's better for it to exist rather than not exist (Studies 1a-c). A
participants thought that a larger population living excellent lives is slightly different way is to ask participants about the relative value of
better than a smaller population living excellent lives. And only 35% two populations. This can be done by asking i.) which out of two pop-
thought that a larger population living good lives is better than a smaller ulations is better or worse (Studies 2a-b), ii) which it would be better to
population living good lives. By contrast, 69% thought that a smaller have come into existence (Studies 3c-d), or iii) which of the two one
population living bad lives is better than a larger population living bad would prefer to come into existence (Studies 3a-b). For simplicity, we do
lives. That is, responses tended to be more in line with totalism in cases not strictly differentiate between these different assessment techniques
of negative lives compared to positive lives. 12% of participants were when discussing our findings (cf. the Limitations section of this paper).
indifferent between smaller and larger populations with the same level
of happiness, demonstrating that only a minority of responses were 6.1. Participant recruitment
completely in line with averagism. Overall, these results show that
participants' responses were neither consistently in line with totalism For all reported studies apart from Study 2b, we recruited partici-
nor averagism. One limitation of this study is that the number “many pants from Amazon MechanicalTurk (MTurk). We collected the data
more” and the welfare difference between “good” and “excellent” lives through the platform Positly, which is a front-end platform that recruits
were not further quantified. As a result, it is not clear if a strict totalist MTurk participants. Positly includes additional proprietary quality
and a strict averagist would of necessity always give different responses. metrics (https://www.positly.com/participants/). Concretely, Positly
Another limitation is that the study did not directly examine the relative by default blocks duplicate and suspicious IP addresses, requires an
strength of participants' preferences. Finally, it is likely that the results approval rate of above 96% and at least 500 HITs, and requires partic-
were confounded by participants' concerns about overpopulation, as ipants to consistently pass attention checks. For Study 2b, we recruited
expressed in some of their comments. participants through Prolific (US nationals, at least 98% approval rate,
Two other psychological findings may also be relevant to the ques- at least 100 prior Prolific submissions).
tion of whether people favor average or total welfare, because they both
reveal cases in which people do not seem to focus on overall magnitudes 6.2. Open science
(i.e., totals). One such finding is the proportion dominance effect, which
refers to people's greater sensitivity to proportions compared to absolute Reports of all measures, manipulations, and exclusions, as well as all
numbers (e.g., Baron, 1997; Fetherstonhaugh, Slovic, Johnson, & Frie- data, analysis code, and experimental materials are available for
drich, 1997). For example, in one study by Bartels (2006), participants download at https://osf.io/qt65w/.
preferred saving 225 out of 300 people over saving 230 out of 900
people. That is, people focus on relative savings, sometimes even at the 6.3. Ethics statement
expense of absolute savings. This response seems to be partly driven by
erroneous deliberative thinking (Bartels, 2006; Mata, 2016) and di- For all studies, relevant ethical guidelines were followed and the
minishes upon reflection (Bartels, 2006). Because the proportion research was approved through University of Oxford's Central Univer-
dominance effect involves deprioritizing total magnitudes, it seems sity Research Ethics Committee, with the reference number MS-IDREC-
possible that some of the psychological mechanisms that drive it also R56657/RE002, and Harvard University's Internal Review Board, with
incline people to focus on the average rather than total level of happi- the reference number IRB14-3025.
ness when making population ethical judgments.
In a similar vein, another potentially relevant psychological phe- 7. Study 1a: trading happiness against suffering
nomenon is scope insensitivity (Frederick & Fischhoff, 1998)—people's
tendency to neglect the size of a problem when evaluating it. For In Study 1a, we investigated how people trade happiness against
example, research has shown that, at least in separate evaluation, people suffering, both across people in a population (i.e., inter-individual) and
are willing to pay roughly the same amount of money to help either within an individual's lifetime (i.e., intra-individual). For a population
2000 birds, 20,000 birds or 200,000 birds (Desvousges et al., 1992). It is with a given size, what percentage of happy vs. unhappy people is
possible, therefore, that scope insensitivity weakens people's preferences required for people to believe that the population is overall positive
for larger over smaller populations. rather than negative (i.e., better to exist rather than not to exist)? Or, for
As this review indicates, while past research has yielded suggestive an individual, what percentage of happy vs. unhappy moments must a
evidence, no past psychological research has directly answered the person experience during their whole life for people to regard their life
questions we began with. We therefore sought to undertake more direct as overall positive rather than negative? Based on previous research on
tests of ordinary people's population ethics, with a particular focus on negativity dominance Baumeister et al., 2001; Rozin & Royzman, 2001)
the positive-negative asymmetry for existing populations as well as for outlined in the introduction, we hypothesized that participants believe
the addition of new people, and the trade-off between totalism and that more happiness is needed to outweigh a given amount of suffering
averagism—three central issues within the moral philosophy of this (i.e., unhappiness). Our study was pre-registered at https://aspredicted.
topic. org/9ch28.pdf and had two between-subjects conditions: inter-
individual vs. intra-individual.
6. The present research
7.1. Method
In this paper, we present nine experiments which test our three
overarching research questions. First, how do people trade unhappiness 7.1.1. Participants
against happiness when assessing the value of a population (Studies 1a- We recruited 529 US American participants online via MTurk ($0.35
c)? Do people value the addition of new people as morally neutral or not payment per participant). 55 were excluded, leaving a final sample of
(Studies 2a-b)? Third, are people focused on the average or total 474 people (230 female, Mage =38.49, SDage =11.99). A priori power
happiness level of a population (Studies 3a-d)? analysis showed that 505 participants were required to detect an effect
Note that we are primarily interested in people's axiological size of d =0.25, α of 0.05, power of 0.8, two-tailed. The effect size was
4

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
estimated based on previous pilot studies. We aimed to recruit 520
participants to account for any exclusions. Sample size was determined
before data collection.
7.1.2. Procedure and materials
Participants in the inter-individual condition were asked to imagine
a world that contains 1000 people. “People in this world comprise one of
two types: they are either extremely happy or they are extremely unhappy.
The people who are happy consistently have extremely positive experiences,
similar to the feeling of falling in love. The people who are unhappy consis-
tently have extremely negative experiences, similar to the feeling of being
tortured.” Participants in the intra-individual condition read: “All people
in this world experience a mixture of both extreme happiness and extreme
unhappiness, meaning that they are extremely happy some of the time, and
extremely unhappy some of the time. When they are happy, they have
extremely positive experiences, similar to the feeling of falling in love. When
they are unhappy, they have extremely negative experiences, similar to the
feeling of being tortured. Furthermore, everyone in this world experiences the Fig. 1. On average, participants in Study 1a believed that ca. 75% of the people
exact same ratio of happiness to unhappiness.” in a population must be happy (25% unhappy) for it still to be better to exist
Participants were then asked the following question: “Given this in- than not exist. Similarly, they believed that ca. 75% of people's lives must be
formation, what percentage of happy and unhappy people[time]would there composed of happy experiences (25% unhappy) for it still to be better for those
people to exist than not exist.
have to be for you to think that this world is overall positive rather than
negative (i.e., so that it would be better for the world to exist rather than not
exist)? In my view, the percentage of happy vs. unhappy people [time] would happiness (e.g. like the feeling of falling in love) over extreme unhap-
need to be as follows: __ % happy people [time] (experiencing positive feelings piness (e.g. like the feeling of being tortured) is required in order to
similar to falling in love) __ % unhappy people [time] (experiencing negative make a population or an individual's life net positive. Participants' in-
feelings similar to being tortured)”. tuitions about the required proportion of happy and unhappy people in a
Afterwards, participants were asked the following questions, which given population were the same as their intuitions about the required
we included for exploratory purposes: “How happy do you feel right now proportion of happy and unhappy moments in people's lifetimes. This is
at this present moment?”, “How happy do you feel in general in life?”, in line with Starmans & Bloom, 2015 findings that showed that judg-
“Would you be willing to relive the worst day of your life if doing so ments about the distribution of happiness within a population closely
would enable you to relive the happiest day of your life?”. Finally, match judgments about the distribution of happiness within a person's
participants responded to demographic questions. lifetime.
Given the particular descriptions of the happiness and unhappiness
7.2. Results experiences in question in this study, participants on average believed
that roughly three times as much happiness is needed per a given
The reported analyses include only participants (N = 474) who amount of suffering for a population or a life to be overall positive.
correctly responded to the check questions. 55 were excluded because However, it is important to note that this number may depend on the
they failed at least one of the attention and manipulation check context, the framing of the question, and the descriptions of happiness
questions. and suffering. In particular, it is not clear whether participants perceived
In the population condition, the mean response for the percentage of the two types of experience as similar in magnitude.
required happiness was 75.62 (SD =16.99) and in the individual con- As a result, the study leaves open the question of why participants
dition it was 74.98 (SD =16.84). An independent t-test revealed that believed more happiness was required to outweigh suffering. One pos-
there were no significant differences between the two conditions, t(468) sibility is that people weigh a given suffering unit more heavily than the
=0.41, p =.68, d =0.04 (Fig. 1). Across both conditions, the percentage equivalent unit of happiness when making their moral evaluations.
for happiness was significantly above the midpoint of 50%, t(473) = According to this view, people are neither following strict classical
32.58, p <.001, d =1.50. utilitarianism (weighing happiness and suffering identically) nor are
For the following analyses we collapsed responses across the two they following strict negative utilitarianism (only weighing suffering).
conditions. The less willing participants were to relive the worst day of Instead, their intuitions lie somewhere in between these views. That is,
their lives in order to relive the best day of their lives, the higher their their intuitions take into account both happiness and suffering but they
stated percentage of required happiness, r(472) = (cid:0) 0.11, p = .02. weigh suffering somewhat more than happiness.
Women stated a higher percentage of required happiness (M =78.4, SD An alternative explanation is that participants simply perceived the
=15.42) than men (M =72.35, SD =17.71), t(469) =3.97, p <.001, d suffering dimension referenced in the instructions as more intense than
=0.36. Women were also less willing to relive the worst day of their the corresponding happiness dimension. According to this view, the
lives in order to relive the best day of their lives (M =3.23, SD =1.93) asymmetry in the observed judgments is not a result of people's
than men (M =3.96, SD =1.95), t(471) =4.11, p <.001, d =0.38. normative evaluation of two equivalent units of happiness and suffering.
Liberals stated a higher percentage of required happiness than conser- In the context of our studies, this may have resulted from our initial
vatives, r(472) =(cid:0) 0.17, p <.001. There were no correlations between exampless of “extreme” happiness (falling love) and “extreme” suffering
the percentage of required happiness and participants' stated level of (torture) — perhaps participants simply felt that torture involves more
current or general happiness. Each of the correlational analyses by way of suffering than falling in love involves by way of happiness,
described above remained significant when controlling for condition which impacted the later judgments they provided. If this is true, then it
(and there was no significant effect of condition for any of them). remains possible that participants followed strict classical utilitarianism,
but simply assumed in this case that suffering was more intense than
7.3. Discussion happiness.
In Study 1a participants believed that a preponderance of extreme
5

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
8. Study 1b: trading happiness against suffering with varying 8.2. Results
intensities
The reported analyses include only participants (N = 356) who
In Study 1a, the happiness and suffering were described as extreme. correctly responded to the check questions. 75 were excluded because
In Study 1b, we aimed to investigate whether people's intuitions about they failed at least one of the attention and manipulation check
trading happiness against suffering are sensitive to the respective in- questions.
tensity levels of those experiences. We did this by manipulating whether Overall, in accordance with our first hypothesis, participants
the happiness and suffering amounts were either mild or extreme. We believed that more happy than unhappy people were required to make it
also introduced a symmetrical and linear happiness scale, ranging from better for the world to exist than not to (see Fig. 2)—the required per-
(cid:0) 100 (extreme suffering), to (cid:0) 1 (mild suffering), to 0 (neutral), to +1 centage of happy people was greater than 50% in all four conditions
(mild happiness), to +100 (extreme happiness). We assumed that this (extreme happiness vs. extreme suffering: t(90) =10.60, p <.001, d =
could, at least partly, clarify that each happiness unit has an equivalent 1.11; mild happiness vs. extreme suffering: t(85) =14.41, p <.001, d =
suffering unit. 1.55; extreme happiness vs. mild suffering: t(81) =4.21, p <.001, d =
We had two hypotheses. Our first hypothesis was that, overall, par- 0.46; mild happiness vs. mild suffering: t(96) =9.81, p <.001, d =1.0).
ticipants would believe that more happiness is needed to outweigh A two-way ANOVA revealed two main effects but no significant inter-
suffering, replicating Study 1. Our second hypothesis was that this action effect. That is, the preference for a preponderance of happy
asymmetry would be more pronounced when both happiness and people was more pronounced both when suffering was extreme as
suffering were extreme as opposed to both mild. We based this hy- compared to mild, F(1, 352) =41.41, p <.001, η p 2 =0.11, as well as
pothesis on findings from previous research on the negativity effect, when happiness was mild as compared to extreme, F(1, 352) =6.54, p =
according to which the negativity of negative events increases at a faster .01, η p 2 =0.02. The interaction between happiness and suffering levels
rate compared to the positivity of positive events (e.g., Rozin & Royz- was not significant, F(1, 352) =2.85, p =.09, η p 2 =0.008.
man, 2001). Rozin and Royzman (2001) call this the principle of greater Tukey HSD post-hoc tests revealed that participants believed that a
steepness of negative gradients. Note, however, that to our knowledge greater percentage of happy people was needed to outweigh extreme
this effect hasn't been demonstrated yet in the context of evaluating the suffering when the happiness experienced by those people was mild (M
moral value of different outcomes. As a sanity check on the data, we also =81.97, SD =20.57) rather than extreme (M =72.03, SD =19.84), p =
hypothesized that participants would believe that a greater percentage .006, d =0.49. By contrast, the percentage of happy people required to
of happiness is required to outweigh suffering as the happiness became outweigh mild suffering did not differ significantly as a function of
less intense and the suffering more intense. The study was pre-registered whether that happiness was mild (M =64.56, SD =14.61) or extreme
at https://aspredicted.org/b9wk4.pdf and had a 2 happiness (extreme (M =61.9, SD =25.62), p =.82, d =0.13. In accordance with our second
vs. mild) x 2 suffering (extreme vs. mild) between-subjects design. hypothesis, participants believed that a greater percentage of happy
people was needed to outweigh suffering when both happiness and
8.1. Method suffering were extreme rather than mild. This difference was statistically
significant with an independent t-test, t(164) =2.93, p =.004, d =0.43,
8.1.1. Participants but not with the Tukey HSD post-hoc test that adjusts for multiple
We recruited 431 US American participants online via MTurk ($0.35 comparisons, p =.06.
payment per participant). 75 were excluded, leaving a final sample of As in the previous study, women required a higher percentage of
356 people (170 female, Mage =38.46, SDage =11.20). A priori power
analysis showed that 351 participants were required to detect an effect
size of f =0.15, α of 0.05, power of 0.8, two-tailed, and four groups. The
effect size was estimated based on previous pilot studies. We aimed to
recruit at least 400 participants to account for any exclusions. Sample
size was determined before data collection.
8.1.2. Procedure and materials
Participants were again presented with the same vignette as in the
population condition of Study 1a. They were asked to envisage a world
containing 1000 people, with these people comprising one of two types,
happy or unhappy. In addition, they were presented with the following
happiness scale: “Let's assume a happiness scale ranging from -100 (extreme
unhappiness) to 0 (neutral) to +100 (extreme happiness). Someone on level
0 is in a neutral state that feels neither good nor bad. Someone on level -1
experiences a very mild form of unhappiness, only slightly worse than being in
a neutral state. Someone on level +1 experiences a very mild form of
happiness, only slightly better than being in a neutral state. Someone on level
-100 experiences the absolute worst form of suffering imaginable. Someone
on level +100 experiences the absolute best form of bliss imaginable.”
Depending on the condition, participants were told that the happy
people were either extremely or mildly happy and that the unhappy Fig. 2. Participants believed that more happy than unhappy people were
people were either extremely or mildly unhappy. They were then asked required to make it better for the world to exist than not exist—the required
the following question: “Given this information, what percentage of percentage of happy people was greater than 50% in all four conditions in Study
1b. Participants were sensitive to the intensity levels of happiness and suffering.
extremely [mildly] happy people vs. extremely [mildly] unhappy people
For example, they believed that a greater preponderance of mildly happy
would there have to be for you to think that this world is overall positive rather
people were required to outweigh the complementary proportion of extremely
than negative (i.e., so that it would be better for the world to exist rather than
unhappy people than to outweigh the complementary proportion of mildly
not exist)? In my view, the percentage of extremely [mildly] happy vs. unhappy people. Moreover, the observed asymmetry was more pronounced
extremely [mildly] unhappy people would need to be as follows: X% when both happiness and suffering were extreme as opposed to both
extremely [mildly] happy people; Y% extremely [mildly] unhappy people”. being mild.
6

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
happy individuals (M =71.95, SD =20.32) than did men (M =68.34, 9.1. Method
SD =22.67) (pooled across all conditions). The difference, however, was
not statistically significant, t(354) =1.58, p =.11, d =0.17. Neither was 9.1.1. Participants
there a significant interaction effect between gender and experimental We recruited 283 US American participants online via MTurk ($0.35
condition on the dependent variable. There were no further noteworthy payment per participant). 5 were excluded, leaving a final sample of 278
correlations between the required percentages of happy individuals and people (112 female, Mage =37.60, SDage =11.94). An a priori power
demographic variables. analysis showed that 128 participants were required to detect an effect
size of d =0.25, α of 0.05, power of 0.8, two-tailed, for a one-sample t-
8.3. Discussion test. The effect size was estimated based on previous pilot studies. Since
there were two conditions, we multiplied that number by two to obtain a
The results of Study 1b replicate and extend our findings from Study minimum desired sample size of 256. We aimed to recruit at least 280
1a, chiefly that people require substantially more happy than unhappy participants to account for any exclusions. Sample size was determined
people to exist in order to believe that a population is worth existing. before data collection.
They also confirm our hypothesis that people are sensitive to the in-
tensity levels of happiness and suffering. Of most importance, and as we 9.1.2. Procedure and materials
had hypothesized, the observed asymmetry was more pronounced when The materials in both conditions were similar to those in Study 1a
both happiness and suffering were extreme as opposed to both being with a few changes. The happiness and suffering levels were described as
mild. Participants believed that a greater preponderance of happy peo- mild (as opposed to extreme in Study 1a). This is because we assumed
ple is required to outweigh the complementary proportion of unhappy that it is easier for participants to imagine a form of happiness that is
people when the happiness and suffering were both extreme compared equally intense as a form of suffering if both of these are described as
to when they were both mild. This effect is in line with the principle of mild than if both are described as extreme.
greater steepness of negative gradients, according to which the nega- Participants were informed that the happy and unhappy experiences
tivity of negative events increases at a faster rate compared to the pos- of the described people were exactly equally intense. Further, they were
itivity of positive events (e.g., Rozin & Royzman, 2001; compare Hurka, told that a typical person—including every person from this particular
2010). population in question—would weigh the two types of experiences
One reason we included the explicit symmetrical happiness scale is equally strongly. For example, it was said that “[i]f a person were to
because we believed this would make it more clear that a given happi- experience one hour of the positive experiences and then one hour of the
ness unit (e.g. +1) has an equivalent suffering unit (e.g. -1) with equally negative experiences, they would consider this whole experience as exactly
strong intensity. However, since the materials did not explicitly equalize neutral, i.e., as neither good nor bad. If they were to experience the positive
the intensity levels of happiness and suffering, it remains unclear how experiences very slightly longer than the negative experiences, they would
participants interpreted the scale. It cannot be ruled out that they still consider this whole experience a positive one (and better than nothing). And if
perceived each suffering unit to be more intense than its numerically they were to experience the negative experiences very slightly longer than the
equivalent happiness unit, even when the two are presented on a com- positive experiences, they would consider this whole experience a negative one
mon symmetrical linear scale. Therefore, although this study improves (and worse than nothing).” Participants had to indicate whether they
upon the method in Study 1, it cannot definitively rule out that the accepted these assumptions or not. Note that participants were asked
observed asymmetry in judgments is driven by an asymmetrical whether they accept the provided information that people from this
perception of the intensity of happiness and suffering and not by an population perceive the positive experiences as being equal in intensity
asymmetrical normative evaluation of happiness and suffering (cf. to the negative experiences; they were not at this point asked whether
Cacioppo & Berntson, 1994). they themselves morally weigh a unit of suffering as much as a unit of
happiness (since this is essentially what our dependent measure ascer-
9. Study 1c: trading happiness against suffering with equal tains). As mentioned above, four participants rejected these assumptions
intensities and were therefore excluded from the analysis.
Next, as in Study 1a, participants were asked about the percentage of
In the previous two studies we found that people believe that more happy people (or time) they personally believe is required to make the
happiness than suffering is needed to make it worthwhile for a popu- population (or lives) net positive. After the main task, participants were
lation to exist. This could be because people believe that, given equal asked whether, when answering the question, they had assumed that the
intensities, suffering is worse than happiness is good (i.e., asymmetric described negative and positive experiences were equally intense or not.
normative evaluation), or it could be because people generally perceive Participants were not excluded from the analysis based on their re-
suffering to be more intense than happiness (i.e., asymmetrical sponses to this question, except in the case of particular follow-up an-
perception). In Study 1c, we aimed to investigate whether people alyses described below. Finally, participants responded to demographic
continue to believe that a preponderance of happiness is required even questions.
when it is explicitly stated that the two experiences are exactly equally
intense. If this is the case, that would be evidence that the observed 9.2. Results
asymmetry is at least partly driven by an asymmetric normative evalu-
ation of happiness and suffering. The reported analyses include only participants (N = 278) who
Similar to Study 1a, the study had two conditions: inter-individual correctly responded to the check questions. Four were excluded for not
vs. intra-individual. Our first hypothesis, which was pre-registered at accepting the stated assumption that happiness and suffering were
https://aspredicted.org/xa8ew.pdf, was that in both conditions, par- equally intense. One was excluded for not having a valid MTurk
ticipants would believe that more than 50% of happiness is needed. Our participant ID.
second hypothesis was that, similar to Study 1a, there would be no In the inter-individual condition, participants on average believed
significant difference between the inter-individual and intra-individual that 61.84% (SD =12.70) of people would have to be happy in order to
conditions. make the population overall net positive, which was significantly
greater than 50%, t(138) = 10.99, p < .001, d = 0.93. In the intra-
individual condition, participants on average believed that people
would need to be happy 60.37% (SD =13.49) of the time to make their
lives overall net positive, again significantly greater than 50%, t(138) =
7

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
9.06, p < .001, d = 0.77. Thus, in both conditions the average was equally. Similarly, there are many other cases where people's moral
significantly above the midpoint of 50%. There was no significant dif- judgments about what is morally good deviates from what the affected
ference between the two conditions, t(275) =0.93, p =.35, d =0.11. people in question would want. For example, a strict negative utilitarian
However, Fig. 3 shows that while the average response (both mean and would consider a life filled with 95% happiness and 5% suffering as
median) was above the midpoint, the modal response in both conditions morally net negative, even if the very person in question would judge it
was 51. as a life worth living. And a hedonic utilitarian would force someone
83% of participants stated that when they answered the question, against their own will into a hypothetical happiness experience machine
they assumed that the described negative and positive experiences were (Nozick, 1974).
equally intense. 9% stated that they assumed that the positive experi- Overall, these findings suggest that the asymmetry we found in the
ences were more intense than the negative experiences and 8% assumed previous two studies is indeed, at least partly, driven by an asymmetric
that the negative experiences were more intense than the positive ex- normative evaluation of happiness and suffering, and not purely by an
periences. We conducted the same analyses described above with only asymmetric perception of the intensity levels of happiness and suffering.
the subset of participants who stated that they assumed both experiences Yet, it should be noted that 37.0% of participants believed that only 50%
were equally intense and received the same results. These results are or 51% of happiness is sufficient to outweigh the complementary
reported in the Supplementary Materials. amount of suffering. By contrast, in Study 1b only 19.6% believed that
As in the previous studies, women required a higher percentage of 50% or 51% of mild happiness is sufficient to outweigh mild suffering,
happy individuals (M =62.35, SD =12.9) than did men (M =60.26, SD with the large majority requiring a greater proportion of happiness. This
= 13.2) (pooled across the two conditions). The difference, however, may provide some evidence that the effect found in Studies 1a and 1b
was not statistically significant, t(242) =1.31, p =.19, d =0.16. Neither was partly driven by asymmetric perceptions of the intensity levels of
was there a significant interaction effect between gender and condition happiness and suffering, with suffering being perceived as more intense
on the dependent variable. There were no further noteworthy correla- than happiness—since when these intensity levels are more strictly
tions between the required percentages of happy individuals and de- equalized, less polarized distributions of happiness and suffering were
mographic variables. judged net positive. Thus, it is possible that the average person's popu-
lation ethical intuitions are driven both by asymmetric perceptions of
the intensity level of happiness and suffering as well as by asymmetric
9.3. Discussion
normative evaluations of happiness and suffering.
The results of Study 1c demonstrate that on average participants
10. Study 2a: adding a new happy or unhappy person
tended to evaluate suffering as worse than happiness is good, even when
both are exactly equally intense. Participants were informed about and
In the previous three studies, participants made judgments about the
accepted the information that the happiness and suffering described
value of existing populations of a constant size. In Study 2a, we exam-
were exactly equally intense. They also accepted the provided infor-
ined judgments about cases in which additional people could be intro-
mation that people from the population in question themselves perceive
duced. In particular, we investigated how participants value the
happiness and suffering as being equally strong, i.e., that they would
addition of a new individual who is either happy or unhappy and who
consider one hour of happiness and one hour of suffering in combination
otherwise would not exist. This allowed us to test whether people accept
as neutral overall. However, despite the fact that people accepted these
the intuition of neutrality, according to which the addition of a life worth
assumptions, on average they continued to believe that ca. 1.5 times as
living to the population is morally neutral, all else being equal, as well as
much mild happiness than suffering is needed to make a given popula-
a related view, called the asymmetry, according to which it is bad to
tion or individual life net positive.
create a new unhappy person but neutral to create a new happy person
It is worth noting that it is not a logical contradiction for participants
(McMahan, 1981).
to believe that more happiness than suffering is needed to make a
Whether one endorses the intuition of neutrality can have dramatic
population or a life morally net positive, while at the same time
implications for moral priority setting. For example, if one believes there
believing that the very people in question weigh happiness and suffering
is value in creating new happy people, it could be a priority to focus
one's efforts on reducing the chances of human extinction and positively
shaping the long term future of humanity due to the vast number of
potential people who could exist in the future (Ord, 2020; Schubert,
Caviola & Faber, 2019). Conversely, if one believes there is no value in
creating new happy people, other priorities may follow, such as
improving the lives of currently existing people or reducing the suffering
of future generations. It has even been claimed that the asymmetry
should lead us to favor human extinction (Beckstead, 2013; Holtug,
2004), given that it is virtually certain that many more people will be
born with lives in which suffering predominates and that there is
nothing to be said for bringing into existence lives in which happiness
predominates, according to the asymmetry. However, this argument is
disputed (see Frick, 2014; Nebel, 2019).
As noted, the intuition of neutrality is supposed to capture the
thought that morality is about “making people happy” and not about
“making happy people” (Narveson, 1973). To our knowledge, there
exists no psychological research so far that directly examines whether
people actually accept the intuition of neutrality. Do people indeed
Fig. 3. Even when happiness and suffering were said to be equally intense,
believe that there is no value in creating a new happy person who would
participants in Study 1c on average believed that more happiness than suffering
not have been created otherwise? And do people—in line with the
is needed to make a given population or individual life net positive. A sub-
stantial proportion of participants, however, weighed happiness and suffering asymmetry—find a world with an additional unhappy person worse but
equally strongly, believing that only a very slightly greater amount of happiness a world with an additional happy person not better?
was required to tip the balance towards net positivity. Based on our findings from Studies 1a-c, we hypothesized that people
8

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
would find a world with an additional unhappy person worse to a
greater extent than they find a world with an additional happy person to
be better. However, we were not sure whether people would fully
endorse the asymmetry, such that they would consider a world with an
additional unhappy person worse but a world with an additional happy
person not better at all.
10.1. Method
10.1.1. Participants
We recruited 162 U.S. participants online via MTurk ($0.40 payment
per participant). Five were excluded, leaving a final sample of 157
people (66 female, Mage =38.86, SDage =11.29). We aimed to recruit
150 participants. The sample size was set in advance based on rough
approximations of what would be needed to comfortably detect the
smallest effect sizes of interest; but they were not based on precise power
analyses. Note that this study was not pre-registered.
Fig. 4. Participants in Study 2a considered a world with an additional happy
10.1.2. Procedure and materials person to be better and a world with an additional unhappy person to be worse.
Participants were first presented with the happiness scale already These judgments were symmetrical, even after factoring out a weak general
used in Study 1b. Then, participants were asked two simple questions preference to add a new (neutral) person. 1 indicates ‘Much worse’, 4 indicates
testing whether they accepted the assumptions of the scale — they were ‘Equally good, 7 indicates ‘Much better’.
asked whether they accepted that a person at level (cid:0) 100 experienced
the “absolute worst form of suffering” and also whether a person at level person into the world, (M =4.23, SD =0.67), t(156) =4.40, p <.001, d
+100 experienced the “absolute best form of happiness.” = 0.35. This suggests the existence of a weak general preference to
Subsequently, in the first task, participants were asked to imagine a create a new person, even if their happiness level is neutral.
world with one million neutral people (on level 0). They were asked to One possibility is that people's judgments about adding a new happy
imagine that a new person on level 0 could be added. They were told that or unhappy person are only symmetrical because they have a general
this “person's life would be exactly neutral with respect to the overall preference to add new people. To test this, we conducted a repeated-
happiness and suffering they experience”. Participants were asked: “In measures ANOVA with ratings of the happy and unhappy person as
terms of its overall value, how much better or worse would this world (con- the paired outcome variables (reverse scored in the unhappy condition)
taining this additional person) be compared to before?” and responded on a and with the rating of adding a neutral person as the covariate. The
7-point scale (1 =Much worse, 4 =Equally good, 7 =Much better). results revealed that there were no significant differences in the ratings
Next, in the main task, participants were again asked to imagine a even when the covariate was included in the analysis, F(1, 156) =1.52,
world with one million neutral people into which a new person could be p =.22, η p 2 <0.001. This means that participants' judgments about the
added. This new person was said to be either extremely happy (+100) or goodness of adding a new happy person and the badness of adding a new
extremely unhappy ((cid:0) 100). The design was within-subjects such that unhappy person still were not asymmetrical, even when the rating of
each participant was presented with both questions (happy person and adding the neutral person was statistically controlled for. There were no
unhappy person) in randomized order on a separate page. The questions noteworthy associations between the dependent variables and de-
were as follows: “One new person could be added to this world. This person mographic measures.
would be extremely unhappy and live a life full of suffering and misery, on
level -100 on the scale.” or “One new person could be added to this world.
This person would be extremely happy and live a life full of bliss and joy, on 10.3. Discussion
level +100 on the scale.” Again, they were asked how much better or
worse the world would be containing the new person compared to the The results show that participants did not consider the addition of
previous world. Finally, participants responded to demographic new people morally neutral. Participants considered a world containing
questions. an additional happy person better and a world containing an additional
unhappy person worse than a world with one million neutral people. In
10.2. Results conflict with our prediction set out at the beginning of this study, par-
ticipants did not find a world with an additional unhappy person to be
The reported analyses include only participants (N = 157) who more bad than they found a world with an additional happy person to be
correctly responded to the check questions. Five were excluded because good. Instead, participants' judgments were symmetrical. Their judg-
they failed at least one of these two questions. ments even remained symmetrical after factoring out their weak general
One-sample t-tests against the midpoint 4 revealed that participants preference for adding a new (neutral) person.
on average judged a world with an additional happy person to be better This suggests that people's axiological judgments about adding a new
(M =5.06, SD =0.99), t(156) =13.44, p <.001, d =1.07, and a world person are roughly in line with classical utilitarianism, according to
with an additional unhappy person to be worse (M =3.08, SD =1.24), t which it is good to create a new happy person and (equally) bad to create
(156) = (cid:0) 9.39, p < .001, d = 0.75 (Fig. 4). Next, we reversed the a new unhappy person. At least when presented with the question we
judgment scores in the unhappy condition, by subtracting them from 8 used in our study, participants' axiological judgments did not reflect the
(M =4.92, SD =1.23) and compared them to the judgment scores in the so-called asymmetry, according to which the creation of an unhappy
happy condition. Surprisingly, a t-test revealed no significant differences person is bad but the creation of a happy person is only neutral.
in the strength of these two preferences, t(156) =1.23, p =.22, d =0.13. This finding is surprising, given our findings from Studies 1a-c. In
There were no significant order effects, depending on which question these studies, we found that participants weighed suffering more than
participants answered first. happiness. We therefore predicted that they would also weigh the
Next, a one-sample t-test against the midpoint 4 revealed that par- suffering of the newly added unhappy person more than the happiness of
ticipants on average judged it as an improvement to add one neutral the newly added happy person. But that was not the case.
9

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
One possibility is that people have a particularly strong preference to questions.
add a new person to a world that only contains one million people, but
that they might have a weaker preference to add a new person to a world 11.2. Results
that already contains a much larger population. The opposite is possible
too: perhaps people's judgments become more asymmetrical if the pre- Twenty-six participants were excluded for rejecting the assumptions
existing world contains no people at all. In Study 2b, we test this or for failing the attention check. Seven additional participants were
possibility. excluded because they responded that the question regarding the addi-
tion of a happy, unhappy, or neutral person did not make sense to them
11. Study 2b: adding a new person to an empty or full world or they did not know how to answer it. This means that over 98% of
participants considered this type of population ethical question sensible.
In Study 2a, we found that participants considered it good to add a The reported analyses include only those participants who agreed with
new happy person to an existing world and bad to add a new unhappy the assumptions, passed the attention checks, and considered the ques-
person to an existing world. In contrast to our hypothesis, we found that tions sensible (N =369).
their judgments were symmetrical. Study 2b had three aims. One-sample t-tests against the midpoint 4 revealed that participants
First, we aimed to replicate the finding that people's moral judgments on average judged a previously empty world with an additional happy
about adding a new happy or unhappy person are symmetrical in a person to be better (M =5.64, SD =1.16), t(84) =12.96, p <.001, d =
between-subjects study design. By contrast, Study 2a featured a within- 1.41, and a previously empty world with an additional unhappy person
subjects study design. Another difference from Study 2a is that in Study to be worse (M =2.38, SD =1.07), t(94) =(cid:0) 14.72, p <.001, d =1.51
2b, participants were asked about the value of adding a new neutral (Fig. 5). Similarly, they judged a previously full world with an additional
person only after, and not before, they were asked about the value of happy person to be better (M =4.74, SD =1.08), t(89) =6.56, p <.001,
adding a new happy or unhappy person. d =0.69, and a previously full world with an additional unhappy person
Second, we explored whether participants are sensitive to the initial to be worse (M =3.14, SD =0.99), t(98) =(cid:0) 8.63, p <.001, d =0.87.
population size. It is possible, for example, that people have stronger Next, we reversed the judgment scores in the unhappy conditions (by
preferences to add a new person to an empty world than to a world subtracting them from 8) and conducted a two-way ANOVA with world
which is already filled with a lot of people (cf. variablevaluetheories, size and valence as the two factors. There was no main effect for the
Hurka, 1983). It's also possible that people's judgments tend to be less valence factor, suggesting that judgments were symmetrical, F(1, 365)
symmetrical if the initial population size is very small or very big. =0.24, p =.63, η p 2 <0.001. There was a main effect for the world size
Third, we tested whether participants consider the questions factor, F(1, 365) =54.16, p <.001, η p 2 =0.13, indicating that partici-
nonsensical or feel that they don't know how to answer them. In all other pants considered it more good to add a happy person to an empty world
studies reported in this paper, participants were forced to give a than to a full world, and accordingly more bad to add an unhappy person
response to each question. However, it is possible that some participants to an empty world than to a full world. There was no interaction effect, F
may consider the questions too difficult or nonsensical and would (1, 365) =0.33, p =.57, η p 2 <0.001. As in Study 2a, even after factoring
therefore prefer to not give an answer. In this study, we tested this out participants' ratings of adding a new neutral person into the world
possibility. there was no effect of valence, F(1, 364) =0.24, p =.62, η p 2 <0.001.
Next, we conducted an analogous ANOVA with the ratings of the
11.1. Method added neutral person as the outcome measure. Again, there was a main
effect for the world factor, F(1, 365) = 15.82, p < .001, η p 2 = 0.04,
11.1.1. Participants indicating that participants considered it better to add a new neutral
We recruited 402 US American participants online via Prolific ($0.40 person to an empty world (M =4.25, SD =0.65) than to a full world (M
payment per participant). Thirty-three were excluded, leaving a final =4.04, SD =0.33). There was no main effect for the valence (happy vs
sample of 369 people (193 female, Mage = 33.25, SDage = 11.3). We unhappy) of the person considered in the preceding task, F(1, 365) =
aimed to recruit 400 participants. The sample size was set in advance 0.29, p =.59, η p 2 <0.001, nor was there an interaction effect, F(1, 365)
based on rough approximations of what would be needed to comfortably =0.16, p = .68, η p 2 <0.001. There were no noteworthy correlations
detect the smallest effect sizes of interest; but they were not based on with demographic variables.
precise power analyses. Note that this study was not pre-registered.
11.3. Discussion
11.1.2. Procedure and materials
The study had a 2 (world: empty vs full) x 2 (valence: happy vs un- The findings of Study 2b replicate our findings from Study 2a, using a
happy) between-subjects design. As in Study 2a, participants were first between-subjects design and a systematic manipulation of the initial
presented with the happiness scale and they were asked the same population size. Participants believed a world becomes better if a new
assumption acceptance questions as in that study. Next, participants in happy person is added to this world and worse if a new unhappy person
the empty world condition were asked to imagine an empty world. is added to this world. Again, these judgments were symmetrical, both
Participants in the full world condition were asked to imagine a world when the initial population size was zero and when it was 10 billion.
filled with 10 billion neutral people (on level 0). By contrast, in Study 2a, These results therefore contrast sharply with those of Studies 1a-1c,
participants were asked to imagine a world filled with 10 million neutral which showed that, for existing populations, people required a pre-
people. Depending on the condition, participants were then asked to ponderance of happiness over suffering in order for the world to be net
imagine that a new happy or unhappy person was added into this world. positive. What explains this discrepancy?
Using the same question as in Study 2a, participants rated whether this One possibility is that the nature of the question in Studies 2a-b,
change made the world better or worse than before. In contrast to Study which involved adding new individuals, prompted different ethical
2a, participants had an additional option they could choose from, which considerations than the question about evaluating the acceptable
was labelled as “This question doesn't make sense to me / I don't know”. happiness-to-suffering ratio within a given (or hypothetical) population.
Next, participants were asked to imagine a new scenario, in which they When people evaluate entire populations, as in Studies 1a-1c, they must
considered the addition of a neutral person to either an empty world or a globally assess the entire balance of happiness to suffering, and deter-
world filled with 10 billion neutral people (with the size of this world mine a minimum acceptable ratio of the two states. This question asks
corresponding to the size of the world in the earlier main task). Finally, them to consider the final state of a given population. In contrast, when
participants responded to an attention check and demographic people evaluate the addition of new people, they are asked to evaluate a
10

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
Fig. 5. Participants in Study 2b considered a world with an additional happy person to be better and a world with an additional unhappy person to be worse. These
judgments were symmetrical, both when the pre-existing world contained no people (empty world) or when it contained 10 billion neutral people (full world).
Ratings were more polarized for the empty than the full world. 1 indicates ‘Much worse’, 4 indicates ‘Equally good, 7 indicates ‘Much better’.
change to a population, not a final state. It might be that people simply population with 1 billion people, as long as the average happiness or
think that, all else equal, it is a good thing to add a happy person, and an unhappiness levels across each population are equal. By contrast, if
equivalently bad thing to add a person experiencing a commensurate people at least partially follow totalism, they should have a preference
level of unhappiness. Such a view is not inconsistent with also believing for larger over smaller happy populations and for smaller over larger
that considerably more happiness than suffering is required to make a unhappy populations.
population as a whole net positive. However, one important feature of Our first hypothesis, which we pre-registered at https://aspredicted.
our studies was that the to-be-added happy people experienced a org/e2jp6.pdf, was that people would prefer smaller over larger un-
happiness level that far exceeded the existing population's average happy populations and larger over smaller happy populations. Thus, we
(which was neutral); similarly, the to-be-added unhappy person expe- hypothesized that people would not strictly follow averagism but would
rienced a level of unhappiness that was far worse than the existing at least partly follow totalism. Our second hypothesis was that their
population's average unhappiness (again, neutral). In both cases there- preference for smaller over larger unhappy populations would be
fore, there was a large contrast between the new person's hedonic stronger than their preference for larger over smaller happy populations.
experience and the existing population's experience, which presumably This second prediction reflects the tendency found in our prior studies
made the assessment of the goodness or badness of adding the new for people to weigh unhappiness more strongly than happiness, which in
person more straightforward. Accordingly, we cannot say on the basis of this context, should amplify the subjective importance of differences in
these results whether adding a new person whose happiness level unhappiness as compared with equivalent differences in happiness.
matches or falls short of the existing population's average would produce
similar results. Indeed, the question of how much people take into ac- 12.1. Method
count a population's average level of happiness (or suffering) is one we
turn to in the ensuing studies. 12.1.1. Participants
We found that participants had a stronger preference when the initial We recruited 868 US American participants online via MTurk ($0.45
population size was zero than when it was 10 billion. That is, partici- payment per participant). 79 were excluded, leaving a final sample of
pants consider it better to add a new person to an empty world than a full 789 people (358 female, Mage =40.11, SDage =12.05). A priori power
world and worse to add an unhappy person to an empty world than a full analysis showed that 788 participants were required to detect an effect
world. One possible explanation is that this effect is driven by a pref- size of d =0.2, α of 0.05, power of 0.8, two-tailed. The effect size was
erence for populations with better average (un)happiness levels — when estimated based on previous pilot studies. We aimed to recruit at least
an additional person is added to an empty world, the population average 850 participants to account for any exclusions. Sample size was deter-
immediately becomes that person's happiness level, whereas when an mined before data collection.
additional person is added to a full world, the population's average shifts
only minutely from the existing average (which in our studies, was 12.1.2. Procedure and materials
neutrality). Thus, the question of whether people take into account the Participants were randomly assigned to one of two conditions: happy
average happiness or unhappiness of a population appears here in populations and unhappy populations. First, they were informed that
another guise. Accordingly, in the studies that follow, we examine this they would be presented with three different scenarios in which they
paper's second research question of whether, in considering the overall would be asked to consider two civilizations that last for millions of
value of a population, people focus on the population's average level of years and that differ only in their size. Depending on the condition,
happiness (i.e., averagism), or its total amount of happiness (i.e., participants were told that all inhabitants of these civilizations are
totalism), or some blend of the two (cf. variable valuetheories, Hurka, happy or unhappy. For reasons of simplicity, all inhabitants of a civili-
1983; Ng, 1989). zation were said to have the same happiness level. It was made clear that
these civilizations would exist for millions of years and that their pop-
12. Study 3a: populations with fixed average levels and varying ulation size would remain constant. Further, participants were informed
total levels of happiness that these civilizations would have no issues with resource depletion,
environmental degradation or overpopulation and that they would have
In Study 3a, we tested whether people strictly follow averagism by multiple Earth-like planets available to them. At this point, participants
varying the size of populations that consist of either happy or unhappy had to indicate whether they accepted the provided information or not.
people. If people strictly follow averagism, they should be indifferent It was not specified where these civilizations would exist and whether
between choosing a small population with just 1000 people or a large there would be other human populations in this world.
11

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
Next, participants responded to three questions presented on sepa- millions vs billions: t(401) =8.24, p <.001, d =0.31; Table 1, Fig. 6). By
rate pages which presented three different comparisons of population contrast, as population size increased, participants' preferences for
sizes, in randomized order (1000 vs. 10,000; 1 million vs. 10 million; 1 smaller over larger unhappy populations persisted (thousands vs mil-
billion vs. 10 billion). Note that the ratio of the small to the large pop- lions: t(386) =6.51, p <.001, d =0.26; millions vs billions: t(386) =
ulation was constant, i.e. a 10-fold increase. The 1 billion vs. 10 billion 4.09, p < .001, d = 0.15). Preferences for larger over smaller happy
scenario of the happy condition, for example, read as follows: “In the first populations decreased with population size more than preferences for
civilization, there are one billion (1B) people living at any one time. In the smaller over larger unhappy populations increased. We tested this by
second civilization, there are ten billion (10B) people living at any one time. comparing the absolute difference between the two extreme dilemmas
The inhabitants of both civilizations are equally happy and lead lives filled (1000 vs 10,000 and 1 billion v 10 billion) across the two conditions, t
with bliss and joy. Every single person's life is well worth living. If only one (773) = 5.05, p < .001, d = 0.36. It is noteworthy that participants'
civilization could come into existence, which would you prefer?” Partici- preference for larger over smaller happy populations decreased so much
pants responded on a 7-point scale (1 =Strongly prefer 1B civilization, 4 with larger population sizes that their preference reversed once it
=No preference, 7 =Strongly prefer 10B civilization). reached a billion: a one sample t-test revealed that participants preferred
After the main task, participants were asked to state in an open text a population of one billion over ten billion happy people, t(401) =
field what the ideal population size for such a civilization would be. (cid:0) 2.90, p =.004, d =0.14.
They then indicated whether they assumed that the civilizations had no On average, there was no clear preference for or against larger over
issues with resource depletion, environmental degradation or over- smaller neutral populations (M = 4.04, SD = 1.57; aggregated, α =
population, and whether they assumed that the two civilizations were 0.83), t(788) =0.63, p =.53, d =0.02. However, t-tests showed that as
identical apart from their size. Next, they responded to an attention population size increased, preferences for larger over smaller neutral
check question asking how the inhabitants of the civilizations were populations decreased(thousand vs million: t(788) =12.64, p <.001, d
described, for which the correct answer was either happy or unhappy. =0.37; million vs billion: t(788) =10.65, p <.001, d =0.27; Table 1).
Next, participants were presented with a short task that we included The tendency in the aggregate to prioritize the larger over the smaller
in order to statistically control for any general preferences participants neutral population correlated positively with the tendency in the
may have had regarding populations of particular sizes. Participants aggregate to prioritize the larger over the smaller happy population, r
were informed that they would be presented with another set of three (400) =0.70, p <.001, and negatively with the aggregate tendency to
scenarios similar to the main task, with the only difference being that prioritize the smaller over the larger unhappy population, r(385) =
rather than the inhabitants being either happy or unhappy, their lives (cid:0) 0.29, p < .001. Using linear regression, we found that participants'
are instead exactly neutral with respect to the overall happiness they aggregate preference for larger over smaller happy populations was still
experience. Apart from this aspect, everything else was the same as in weaker than their aggregate preference for smaller over larger unhappy
the main task and participants responded to the same three scenarios in populations even after controlling for their aggregate preference (or lack
randomized order. thereof) for larger over smaller neutral populations, t(786) =8.24, p <
Finally, participants responded to demographic questions, including .001, d =0.57, b =0.27.
a question about their religiosity and belief in the afterlife. The median response for the ideal population size was 1.5 million for
the happy civilization and 100 for the unhappy civilization. There were
no correlations between these responses and demographic variables,
12.2. Results
including religiosity and belief in an afterlife.
The reported analyses include only participants (N = 789) who
12.3. Discussion
correctly responded to the check questions. 11 failed to accept the in-
formation provided at the beginning of the study, 38 stated after the task
The results of Study 3a confirm our hypothesis that participants
that they did not assume that there were no issues regarding resource
would not strictly follow averagism. If they had done so, they would
depletion, environmental degradation, and overpopulation, 23 stated
have been indifferent between each of the different population com-
after the task that they did not assume that the two populations had the
parisons presented in this study. Instead, participants at least partly
same happiness or unhappiness levels, and 35 failed a simple attention
followed totalism. They had a preference for larger over smaller happy
check.
populations and for smaller over larger unhappy populations.
One sample t-tests against the mid-point (4) revealed that partici-
We also found that participants' preference for smaller over larger
pants preferred larger over smaller happy populations (M =4.39, SD =
unhappy populations was stronger than their preference for larger over
1.65, aggregated, α = 0.82), t(401) = 4.69, p < .001, d = 0.23, and
smaller happy populations. This effect persisted even when controlling
smaller over larger unhappy populations (M =5.36, SD =1.50, aggre-
for a potential preference for larger or smaller neutral populations. Thus,
gated and reverse coded, α =0.84), t(386) =17.78, p <.001, d =0.91. people show “asymmetric scope sensitivity” with respect to happy and
As predicted, participants' preference for larger over smaller happy
unhappy population sizes. And this asymmetric scope sensitivity was
populations was weaker than their preference for smaller over larger
more pronounced the larger the population sizes got.
unhappy populations, t(785) =8.67, p <.001, d =0.62.
It is possible that this asymmetric scope sensitivity can be explained
Paired sample t-tests showed that as population size increased, par-
by the fact that, normatively speaking, people consider suffering more
ticipants' preferences for larger over smaller happy populations
bad than they consider (equivalently intense) happiness to be good, and
decreased (thousands vs millions: t(401) =10.63, p <.001, d =0.42;
they are therefore particularly focused on minimizing the extent of
suffering rather than maximizing the extent of happiness. An alternative
Table 1 hypothesis is that people consider the described suffering as more
Mean ratings in Study 3a for happy, unhappy, and neutral population compar-
intense than the described happiness. Study 3a does not allow us to
isons of different population sizes. 1 indicates a strong preference for the smaller
distinguish between these two hypotheses. In Study 1c we found that the
population, 4 indicates no preference, 7 indicates a strong preference for the
average participant's population ethical intuitions remained asymmet-
larger population. Note that these are raw values (not reversed).
rical even when they believed happiness and suffering to be equally
1000 vs 10,000 1 million vs 10 million 1 billion v 10 billion intense. We therefore believe it is plausible that even when participants
Happy 5.12 (1.84) 4.33 (1.93) 3.71 (1.99) believe happiness and suffering to be equally intense, they would still
Unhappy 3.04 (1.99) 2.56 (1.66) 2.32 (1.49) demonstrate a similar asymmetric scope sensitivity effect.
Neutral 4.65 (1.82) 3.98 (1.84) 3.48 (1.81)
Participants did not consistently prefer the happy populations to be
12

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
Happy Unhappy Fig. 6. Absolute preference strength with increasing population
sizes in Study 3a. Note that the values in the unhappy condition
6
were reverse coded to better demonstrate the asymmetric trend
across the two conditions. Preferences for larger over smaller happy
populations and preferences for smaller over larger unhappy pop-
ulations were similarly strong when the comparison was between
populations of 1000 and 10,000 respectively. However, the greater
the populations became (e.g. 1 million vs. 10 million or 1 billion vs.
10 billion), the stronger the preference for smaller over larger un-
4 happy populations became and the weaker the preference for larger
over smaller happy populations became.
2
1,000 vs 10,000 1 million vs 10 million 1 billion vs 10 billion
as large as possible. Instead, in our main task we found that participants higher average level of happiness and a preference for populations with
preferred the happy civilization to be smaller than 10 billion, but larger a lower average level of suffering when the total amount of happiness or
than 1 million. And when directly asked to state their ideal population suffering between contrasting populations is held constant. In Study 3a,
size for a happy population, participants' median response was 1 million. we found that people's totalist preference was stronger for suffering than
When interpreting these results, it is important to note that participants for happiness. Based on this, our second hypothesis was that people's
did not necessarily assume that these populations would encompass all averagist preference would also be stronger for suffering than for
of humanity. Our instructions left open the possibility that there could happiness.
be other human populations in the world.
It is not entirely clear why participants preferred the happy civili-
13.1. Method
zations to be smaller than 1 billion. A similar pattern was found in the
neutral happiness task. Even though on average participants had no
13.1.1. Participants
statistically significant preference for larger or smaller neutral civiliza-
We recruited 866 US American participants online via MTurk ($0.45
tions, descriptively we found that they tended to prefer neutral civili-
payment per participant). 41 were excluded, leaving a final sample of
zations with a population size between 1 million and 10 million. One 825 people (358 female, Mage =39.54, SDage =12.35). A priori power
interpretation is that people have a general preference for civilizations
analysis showed that 788 participants were required to detect an effect
with a specific population size that they deem neither too large nor too size of d =0.2, α of 0.05, power of 0.8, two-tailed. The effect size was
small. Perhaps people are concerned that if a civilization contains too
estimated based on previous pilot studies. We aimed to recruit at least
many people this could lead to negative consequences, such as over-
850 participants to account for any exclusions. Sample size was deter-
crowdedness. While we tried to rule out such concerns by making clear
mined before data collection.
that the civilizations would have multiple Earth-like planets available
and that they would have no issues with overpopulation, and even
13.1.2. Procedure and materials
excluded participants who did not accept these assumptions, it is still
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two conditions: happy
possible that such concerns were partly driving participants' intuitions.
or unhappy populations. The instructions and the task were similar to
Several participants mentioned in their comments that they were con-
those used in Study 3a. Participants were informed that they would be
cerned that overly large civilizations could cause overcrowdedness.
presented with three different scenarios in which they would be asked to
Another surprising finding was that when directly asked to state their
consider two civilizations and judge which one they would prefer to
ideal population size for an unhappy population, participants' median
come into existence. They were informed that these civilizations will
response was 100. We do not know why participants did not believe that
have no issues with resource depletion, environmental degradation,
the ideal population size was 0. Their response appears also inconsistent
crowdedness, or overpopulation and that they will have multiple Earth-
with our findings from Studies 2a-b in which participants considered it
like planets available to them. Similar to Study 1b, participants were
wrong to create new unhappy people. One possibility is that participants presented with a happiness scale, ranging from (cid:0) 100 to +100.
were driven by concerns for certain non-welfarist goods, such as an
Participants were presented with three dilemmas in randomized
intrinsic preference for the continued existence of humanity.
order in which two possible civilizations were pitted against each other.
Depending on the condition, the inhabitants of both civilizations were
13. Study 3b: populations with fixed total levels and varying
either happy or unhappy. The civilizations differed in size and average
average levels of happiness
happiness level but were equated by design in terms of their total
happiness levels. For example: “Civilization A contains 4,000 people at
In Study 3a, we found that people have totalist intuitions in cases +60 happiness [-60 unhappiness]. Civilization B contains 6,000 people
where populations differ in their total levels but have constant average at +40 happiness [-40 unhappiness]”. In the other two dilemmas the
levels. However, this finding does not rule out that people also have
population sizes were 4 million/6 million or 4 billion/6 billion respec-
averagist intuitions in addition. In Study 3b, we aimed to investigate tively. Participants responded on a 7-point scale (1 = Strongly prefer
whether people have a preference for populations with greater average civilization A, 4 =No preference, 7 =Strongly prefer civilization B).
levels of happiness or smaller average levels of suffering if the total
After the main task, we checked whether participants understood
amount of happiness or suffering is the same across populations.
how to evaluate populations based on the average and total principles.
Our first hypothesis, which we pre-registered at https://aspredicted.
We presented them once again with one dilemma from the main task
org/3we4j.pdf, was that people have a preference for populations with a
(4000 vs 6000 people) and asked them in which civilization, (1) the
13

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
average level, and (2) the total amount of happiness (or suffering) is Table 2
greater, smaller or the same. On the next page, we asked them to Mean ratings in Study 3b for comparisons between populations of different sizes
explicitly calculate the average and total amounts. For example, we but equal total amounts of happiness or suffering, i.e., the smaller populations
asked: “What is the average level of happiness [unhappiness] in civili- have an average happiness (unhappiness) level of +60 ((cid:0) 60) and the larger
zation A?” or “What is the total amount of happiness [unhappiness] in populations have an average happiness (unhappiness) level of +40 ((cid:0) 40). 1
indicates a preference for the smaller population with higher happiness level
civilization A (i.e. the sum of happiness [unhappiness] across all peo-
(Happy condition) or the larger population with smaller suffering level (Un-
ple)?”. In the happy population condition, the correct average level of
happy condition), 4 indicates no preference, 7 indicates the opposite preference.
happiness of civilization A (4,000 people at level +60) would be (4000 *
60) / 4000 =60, which is higher than for civilization B (6,000 people at 4,000 vs 6,000 4 million vs 6 million 4 billion vs 6 billion
level +40). The correct total amount of happiness of civilization A would Happy 2.35 (1.55) 2.23 (1.48) 2.25 (1.55)
be 4000 * 60 =240,000, which is the same as for civilization B (6,000 * Unhappy 2.32 (1.24) 2.32 (1.19) 2.37 (1.24)
40 =240,000). We expected that a substantial proportion of participants
would fail to calculate these numbers correctly and therefore did not
pre-register exclusions based on these responses. Finally, participants Table 3
responded to demographic questions. Mean ratings in Study 3c for comparisons between populations of different sizes
and different average levels of happiness or suffering. 1 stands for a preference in
line with averagism (populations with better average but worse total levels), 4
13.2. Results stands for no preference, 7 stands for a preference in line with totalism (pop-
ulations with better total but worse average levels). Responses were reverse
The reported analyses include only participants (N = 825) who scored in the unhappiness condition.
correctly responded to the check questions. 41 were excluded either for
Happiness Unhappiness
failing the attention check or for failing to accept the provided infor-
Intuition Reflection Intuition Reflection
mation at the beginning of the study.
One sample t-tests against the mid-point revealed that, in the happy 100,000@90 4.79 (2.13) 5.04 (2.08) 4.34 (2.08) 4.76 (1.99)
100,000@70 3.51 (2.08) 4.21 (2.17) 3.55 (1.96) 4.06 (2.11)
population condition, participants preferred (smaller) populations with
100,000@50 2.71 (1.76) 3.28 (2.08) 3.12 (1.92) 3.19 (2.08)
greater average happiness levels over (larger) populations with lower
million@50 2.87 (1.82) 3.49 (2.11) 3.44 (2.05) 3.77 (2.23)
average happiness levels, notwithstanding that their total happiness billion@50 2.91 (1.93) 3.55 (2.15) 3.80 (2.18) 4.22 (2.31)
levels were equivalent (M =2.28, SD =1.42, aggregated across the three
different population size dilemmas in the happy condition, α =0.92), t
(426) =(cid:0) 25.10, p <.001, d =1.21. Similarly, in the unhappy popu- average level of (un)happiness (principle check question). 86%
(happiness condition) and 88% (unhappiness condition) of participants
lation condition, participants also preferred (larger) populations with
correctly calculated the average level for civilization A (±60), χ2(1) =
lower average suffering levels over (smaller) populations with greater
average suffering levels but the same total suffering (M =2.34, SD = 0.71, p =.40. And 85% (happiness condition) and 88% (unhappiness
condition) of participants correctly calculated the average level for
1.10, reverse scored and aggregated across the three different popula-
tion size dilemmas in the unhappy condition, α = 0.88), t(397) = civilization B (±40), χ2(1) =0.85, p =.36. When asked directly, only
(cid:0) 30.05, p <.001, d =2.34. There was no difference in the strength of 47% of participants correctly indicated that both civilizations had the
this preference between the happy and unhappy conditions, t(798) = same total level of (un)happiness (principle check question). Only 35%
(cid:0) 0.65, p = .52, d = (cid:0) 0.05 (Fig. 7). There were also no noteworthy (happiness condition) and 26% (unhappiness condition) of participants
correctly calculated the total average level for civilization A
differences between the three types of dilemmas (which varied by
(±240,000), χ2(1) =7.86, p =.005. And only 35% (happiness condition)
population size) within each condition (Table 2). (See Table 3.)
and 25% (unhappiness condition) of participants correctly calculated
Next, we looked at the follow-up questions. When asked directly,
the total average level for civilization B (±240,000), χ2(1) =9.29, p =
80% of participants correctly indicated which civilization had a greater
.002. In both conditions, 35–37% of participants incorrectly calculated
that the total levels were ±60 (civilization A) and ±40 (civilization B)
respectively, suggesting that they misunderstood the question and did
not multiply the stated individual happiness level by the number of
people. When all participants who responded incorrectly to at least one
of the two principle check questions or one of the four calculation check
questions were excluded, the pattern of the results remained the same
(see Supplementary Materials). There were no noteworthy correlations
between the dependent variables and demographic variables.
13.3. Discussion
The results of Study 3b show that participants had averagist prefer-
ences when the total amount of happiness or suffering was held constant
across populations. In Study 3a, we found that participants had broadly
totalist preferences when the average amount of happiness or suffering
was held constant across populations. Thus, together these two studies
suggest that people seem to have both averagist and totalist preferences
Fig. 7. Participants in Study 3b had a preference for populations with larger
to some degree.
average happiness levels (left plot) and smaller average suffering levels (right
It was surprising to see that so many participants failed to correctly
plot) even though the total amounts of happiness or suffering between the two
infer that both populations had the same total amount of happiness. One
populations were the same. 1 indicates a preference for the smaller population
with higher happiness level (left plot) or the larger population with smaller possibility is that people did not understand how to answer the question
suffering level (right plot), 4 indicates no preference, 7 indicates the oppo- correctly. For example, they might not have understood that one can
site preference. calculate the total level of happiness simply by multiplying the level of a
14

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
single individual by the number of people. This calculation is highly recruit 600 participants. The sample size was set in advance based on
abstract and unfamiliar to most people. Furthermore, the units them- rough approximations of what would be needed to comfortably detect
selves are very abstract and possibly meaningless to many people (i.e., the smallest effect sizes of interest; but they were not based on precise
what does it really mean to say that a population has a happiness “level” power analyses.
of 240,000?). Another possibility is that at least some participants
rejected the idea that one could answer the question via an algebraic 14.1.2. Procedure and materials
calculation. That is, they might not think that happiness can be quan- The instructions and the task were similar to those in Study 3b.
tified and multiplied in this manner. While this sort of philosophical Participants were informed that they would be presented with five
objection could exist, we suspect that it is not very common among lay different scenarios in which they are asked to consider two civilizations
people. Nevertheless, when we conducted the same analysis including and judge which one they would find better. Again, they were informed
only those participants who answered these questions correctly we that these civilizations will have no issues with resource depletion,
found the same pattern of results. This suggests that people have environmental degradation or overpopulation and that they will have
averagist preferences in cases where the averages differ and the totals multiple Earth-like planets available to them. Participants were again
are constant regardless of whether they correctly calculated the total asked whether they accept these assumptions. Similar to Study 1b,
amounts or not. participants were presented with a happiness scale, ranging from (cid:0) 100
to +100.
14. Study 3c: populations with both varying total levels and On the next page, participants in the intuition conditions read:
average levels of happiness “When you answer the next three questions, please try to respond quickly.
Don't think too much about the answer. Just follow your first gut reaction and
In Study 3c, we looked at cases in which populations differ both in intuition.” Participants in the reflection conditions read: “When you
their total and average levels. The central question was whether people answer the next three questions, please try to think long and hard about the
would prefer smaller populations with higher average but lower total answer. Make sure not to follow your first gut reaction blindly. Instead, try to
happiness levels (averagism) over larger populations with lower average reflect more deliberately about your answer. With further reflection, you
but higher total happiness levels (totalism). (And vice versa for cases might agree with your initial gut reaction, but you might also disagree with it.
involving suffering instead of happiness.) The study had two main ob- Try to rely only on your considered reflection in answering the following
jectives. The first objective was to investigate whether people have a mix questions.”
of both averagist and totalist tendencies in cases where populations Next, participants were presented with five dilemmas in which two
differ in both their average and total levels. Our hypothesis was that in possible civilizations (Civilization A and B) were pitted against each
such cases, people would have intuitions in line with both principles other. Depending on the condition, the inhabitants of both civilizations
which could counteract each other. We, therefore, assumed that, across were all either happy or unhappy. In all five dilemmas, Civilization A
various dilemmas, people would make choices that are neither strongly contained 1000 people on level ±100 (referred to as 1000@100),
in line with averagism nor with totalism, but rather that their choices whereas the size and average level of Civilization B varied.
would lie in between the recommendations of these two principles. In the first three dilemmas, the three comparison civilizations
As a further subquestion we aimed to determine the point at which differed from Civilization A in both their total and average happiness
(roughly) people cross the “threshold” between favoring the higher levels, but they did so to differing extents. Civilization B contained either
average happiness or favoring the higher total happiness. In other 1) 100,000 people on level ±90 (referred to as 100,000@90), 2)
words, how much higher must the total happiness of one population be 100,000 people on level ±70 (referred to as 100,000@70), 3) 100,000
in order to outweigh its reduced average happiness, and vice versa? We people on level ±50 (referred to as 100,000@50).
did not have a specific hypothesis regarding this question. In the last two dilemmas, the two civilizations compared against
Our second objective was to investigate whether people's population Civilization A had the same average happiness levels as the civilization
ethical intuitions are affected by their thinking style—that is, whether in the third dilemma (100,000@50), while differing in their total
they think intuitively or reflectively. One possibility is that focusing on happiness levels. Civilization B contained either 4) 1 million people on
the average level is intuitively predominant because in certain contexts level ±50 (referred to as million@50), 5) 1 billion people on level ±50
it is cognitively less taxing. It only requires the single cognitive step of (referred to as billion@50).
comparing two readily available numbers (at least in our study) and For example, the 100,000@90 dilemma in the happiness condition
requires no attention to the respective population sizes. Focusing on the read as follows: “Civilization A contains 1,000 happy people on level
total level, by contrast, requires the additional cognitive step of multi- +100. Civilization B contains 100,000 happy people on level +90. If
plying each population's average level by its size, and then comparing only one civilization could come into existence, which one would be
these two numbers with each other. Therefore, we hypothesized that better?” Participants responded on a 7-point scale (1 =Definitely civili-
when people think intuitively, their preferences become more in line zation A, 4 =Equally good, 7 =Definitely civilization B).
with averagism, whereas when they think more reflectively, their pref- After the main task, participants had to complete a comprehension
erences become more in line with totalism. check question that asked how someone on level 0 would feel according
Finally, as a confirmation of the effects we found in Studies 3a and to the happiness scale. The correct answer was “neither good nor bad”,
3c, we hypothesized that people's tendency to prefer one population which is the exact wording used when the happiness scale was presented
over another would get weaker if both the average and total levels of at the beginning of the study. Finally, participants responded to de-
that population worsen. mographic questions.
Our study was pre-registered at https://aspredicted.org/zw6ek.pdf
and had a 2 (valence: happiness vs unhappiness) x 2 (thinking style: 14.2. Results
intuition vs reflection) between-subjects study design.
The reported analyses include only participants (N = 461) who
14.1. Method correctly responded to the check questions. 159 were excluded because
they failed the comprehension check that asked how someone on level
14.1.1. Participants 0 on the previously described happiness scale would feel (correct
We recruited 622 US American participants online via MTurk ($0.45 answer: neither good nor bad). Of those who answered incorrectly, 96
payment per participant). 161 were excluded, leaving a final sample of believed that someone on level 0 would feel extremely unhappy, 46
461 people (220 female, Mage = 39.35, SDage = 11.79). We aimed to believed that someone on level 0 would feel extremely happy, and 17
15

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
believed that someone on level 0 would feel mildly happy. And 2 Table 4
additional participants were excluded because they did not accept the One-sample t-tests against the midpoint (4) in Study 3c. Degrees of freedom were
assumptions stated at the beginning of the study (regarding resource 212 in the happiness condition and 247 in the unhappiness condition. A positive
depletion, etc.). We report the same analyses with the full sample t-value indicates that mean responses tended to be more in line with totalism. A
without any exclusions in the Supplementary Materials. The pattern of negative t-value indicates that mean responses tended to be more in line with
averagism.
the results is the same.
In line with our first hypothesis, participants' responses aggregated Happiness Unhappiness
across all five dilemmas and across thinking style were neither strongly t-value Cohen's d t-value Cohen's d
in line with averagism nor with totalism but instead they lay in between
100,000@90 6.27*** 0.43 4.19*** 0.27
the recommendations of these two principles (Fig. 8, Table 4). Note that 100,000@70 (cid:0) 1.09 0.07 (cid:0) 1.58 0.10
responses in the unhappiness conditions were reverse coded for all re- 100,000@50 (cid:0) 7.67*** 0.53 (cid:0) 6.69*** 0.43
ports and analyses of this study. A one-sample t-test against the mid- million@50 (cid:0) 6.20*** 0.42 (cid:0) 3.00** 0.19
point (4) revealed that in the happiness conditions, participants had a billion@50 (cid:0) 5.56*** 0.38 0.03 0.002
weak aggregated preference (aggregated, α = 0.92) for the smaller ** p <.01.
populations with higher average happiness but lower total happiness *** p <.001.
over the larger populations with higher total happiness but lower
average happiness (M =3.62, SD =1.78), t(212) =(cid:0) 3.10, p =.002, d = was the case in both the happiness and unhappiness conditions. In the
0.21. In the unhappiness condition, by contrast, participants did not last three dilemmas, participants largely continued to favor the popu-
have an aggregated preference (aggregated, α =0.90) for either of the lation with the better average level (as opposed to the population with
two populations (M =3.82, SD =1.76), t(247) =(cid:0) 1.62, p =.12, d = the better total level), even when the size (and therefore total level) of
0.10. the larger population became much bigger. However, on average, as the
So far, we have only looked at the aggregated responses across di- size of the larger population increased, participants' tendency to favor
lemmas. Next, we tested for each individual dilemma (across both the population with the better total level slightly increased
thinking style conditions) whether responses were significantly above or (100,000@50 and million@50: t(460) = (cid:0) 4.62, p < .001, d = 0.16;
below the midpoint (4). This allows us to infer, for each dilemma, million@50 and billion@50: t(460) =(cid:0) 4.54, p <.001, d =0.11). These
whether participants' responses were more in line with averagism, effects, however, were only robustly significant in the unhappiness
totalism, or whether they lay in between the recommendations of the condition (100,000@50 and million@50: t(247) =(cid:0) 4.19, p <.001, d =
two principles. The results in Table 4 — for both happy and unhappy 0.21; million@50 vs billion@50: t(247) =(cid:0) 4.76, p <.001, d =0.19) but
populations – show that participants' responses tended to be more in line less so in the happiness condition (100,000@50 and million@50: t(212)
with totalism in the 100,000@90 dilemma, roughly at the midpoint in =(cid:0) 2.09, p =.04, d =0.09; million@50 vs billion@50: t(212) =(cid:0) 0.96,
the 100,000@70 dilemma, and more in line with averagism in the p = .34, d = 0.03). This asymmetrical sensitivity for the size of pop-
100,000@50 dilemma. In the two last dilemmas, million@50 and ulations is in line with the findings of Study 3a. In that study, we had
billion@50, participants' responses tended to be more in line with similarly observed that people's preference for larger over smaller happy
averagism. The only exception were responses in the billion@50 populations diminished as the respective population sizes increased
dilemma in the unhappiness condition, which were roughly at the (and reversed for very large population sizes); in contrast, smaller un-
midpoint. happy populations were consistently preferred, regardless of population
In the first three dilemmas, predictably, participants were more in- size.
clined to favor the population with the better average level (as opposed Next, we turned to the question of whether thinking style affects
to the population with the better total level) as the average (and people's population ethical judgments. A two-way ANOVA revealed a
therefore also total) level of the larger population declined main effect for thinking style on the aggregated responses (across all five
(100,000@90 and 100,000@70: t(460) = 12.04, p < .001, d = 0.43; dilemmas), F(1, 457) = 7.42, p = .007, η p 2 = 0.02. In line with our
100,000@70 and 100,000@50: t(460) =9.89, p <.001, d =0.37). This hypothesis, participants had stronger preferences for the populations
Happy Reflection Happy Intuition Unhappy Reflection Unhappy Intuition Fig. 8. Participants' preferences in each of the
five dilemmas, as function of happiness
6
(happy vs. unhappy) and thinking style
(reflective vs. intuitive) in Study 3c. Re-
sponses were reverse scored in the unhappi-
ness condition. 1 stands for a preference in
line with averagism (populations with better
average but worse total levels), 4 stands for
no preference, 7 stands for a preference in line
with totalism (populations with better total
but worse average levels). Participants had to
choose between a civilization of 1000 people
4
on level ±100 on the one hand and a civili-
zation of either 100,000 people on level ±90,
±70, ±50, or a civilization of one million
people on level ±50, or a civilization of one
billion people on level ±50 on the other hand.
2
100,000@90 100,000@70 100,000@50 million@50 billion@50
16

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
with the better average level (and worse total level) when they were asymmetry in the range of possible values between averagism and
thinking intuitively compared to when they were thinking reflectively totalism. For totalism, there are no lower and upper limits because
(Fig. 7). There was no main effect for the valence factor, F(1, 457) = population sizes can get infinitely big. For averagism, by contrast, clear
1.38, p =.24, η p 2 =0.003, and neither was there an interaction between upper and lower limits were defined as (cid:0) 100 and +100. Because of this,
valence and thinking style, F(1, 457) =0.38, p =.54, η p 2 <0.001. total utility differences can get much bigger (at least in numeric terms)
Finally, we looked at associations with demographic measures. than average utility differences. Further, the availability of such upper
Aggregating across all dilemmas and conditions (valence and thinking and lower limits offers a reference point that makes it easier to evaluate
style), women (M =3.74, SD =1.71) tended to give responses that were how good or bad a certain average level is (see the evaluability heuristic;
more in line with averagism than men (M =4.08, SD =1.85), t(459) = Hsee & Zhang, 2010). For example, it is easy to tell that an average level
2.05, p = .04, d = 0.19. This gender effect was moderated by the of +90 is very good because it is close to the maximum, whereas it is
thinking style manipulation. There was no gender difference in the difficult to tell how good a total level of +9,000,000 is. This difference in
reflection condition (women: M =3.99, SD =1.74; men: M =3.93, SD = evaluability between average and total levels may push people to focus
1.94), t(219) =0.23, p =.82, d =0.03. But there was a gender difference more on average levels. An additional complication is that there could
in the intuition condition, such that women were more inclined to show be diminishing marginal sensitivity for total levels. That is, comparing 1
averagist preferences than men (women: M =3.52, SD =1.66; men: M person vs. 4 million people may seem very different from comparing
=4.23, SD =1.76), t(238) =3.18, p <.001, d =0.41. There were no 100,001 people vs. 5 million people. More research is required to
other noteworthy associations with demographic measures. investigate more precisely how people weigh averagism against
totalism.
14.3. Discussion The dilemmas used in this study resemble the Repugnant Conclusion,
which was discussed by Derek Parfit (1984) as an argument against
In this study, we investigated participants' preferences in cases where totalism. Parfit's argument, however, considers an extremely large
one population has a better average but worse total level of happiness population with an average happiness level just barely above zero. Our
and the other population has a better total but worse average level. We dilemmas did not feature such an extreme population. However, despite
found that in such cases participants' responses were neither strongly this difference, we believe our findings capture the same intuitions
aligned with averagism nor with totalism. Instead, they lay between the people have in response to the philosophical argument. Based on our
recommendations of these two principles, suggesting that people apply results, it is likely—as Parfit hypothesized—that people would prefer a
both principles simultaneously, even when they conflict with each other. smaller population on average level + 100 than an extremely large
Similar to Study 3b, there were no noteworthy differences between the population with average level +1, even if the second population has a
happiness and unhappiness conditions. higher total level.
Another research question we asked was how people trade-off dif-
ferences in average or total happiness against each other. We found that, 15. Study 3d: mere additions
on average, participants were roughly indifferent between a population
of 1000 people on level 100 and a population of 100,000 people on level In Study 3d, we investigated whether people show averagist ten-
70. One interpretation is that, in this dilemma, participants considered a dencies even in cases where averagism favors adding unhappy people or
drop of 30 average level points roughly to be outweighed by the increase disfavors adding happy people to a population — that is, cases in which
of almost 100,000 people who were still very happy overall. Or, more most philosophers agree that averagism is wrong (Greaves, 2017).
precisely, they considered the 0.70-fold decrease in average level To test this, we asked participants which out of two populations they
roughly to be outweighed by a 70-fold increase in total level. consider better: a population consisting of 1000 very happy (unhappy)
As mentioned above, aggregated across all dilemmas, average re- people or a population of 2000 people consisting of 1000 very happy
sponses were neither strongly aligned with averagism nor with totalism (unhappy) people and an additional 1000 people who are also happy
but lay between the recommendations of these two principles. However, (unhappy) but to a lesser extent than the first 1000. The only difference
there were some dilemmas in which participants had clear-cut prefer- between the two populations is, therefore, that the larger population
ences — for instance, they favored a population of 100,000 people at contains an additional 1000 slightly less happy (or unhappy) people.
level 90 over one of 1000 people at level 100 (in line with totalism), and Thus, from a totalist perspective the larger happy population is better
conversely, they quite consistently favored a population of 1000 people because the additional people increase the total happiness. Similarly,
at level 100 over populations of 100,000 people, 1 million people, and from a totalist perspective the larger unhappy population is worse
even 1 billion people at level 50 (in line with averagism). Thus, in because the additional people increase the total suffering. However,
accordance with the findings of Study 3a and 3b, we found that re- from an averagist perspective, the smaller happy population is better
sponses were influenced by changes in the relative average and total because the additional happy people worsen the average happiness
levels of the two populations. The fact that participants' responses stayed level. Similarly, from an averagist perspective, the larger unhappy
roughly in line with averagism even when the size of the larger popu- population is better because the additional unhappy people improve the
lation with a 50-point average level became extremely large is note- average unhappiness level. Based on our previous findings, we expected
worthy. It suggests that people appear to have a threshold for a participants' judgments to be influenced by both averagist and totalist
minimally acceptable average level that must be met, such that even a tendencies.
much greater total level cannot outweigh the disvalue of a population Furthermore, we were interested in whether people's responses are
with an average level that is below this threshold (which seems to be affected by whether they think intuitively or reflectively. In line with our
greater than 50). findings of Study 3c, we hypothesized that when people think reflec-
We also found that, in line with our hypothesis, thinking style tively as opposed to intuitively this would reduce their averagist
affected participants' population ethical intuitions. When prompted to tendencies.
think intuitively, participants' responses were more inclined towards Our study was pre-registered at https://aspredicted.org/c56dx.pdf
averagism. And when prompted to think reflectively, participants' re- and had a 2 (valence: happiness vs unhappiness) x 2 (thinking style:
sponses were more inclined towards totalism. In Study 3d, we explore intuition vs reflection) between-subjects study design.
this finding further.
An open research question that our study cannot answer is the
relative weight people intuitively place on the averagism and totalism
principles when these two conflict. Such an analysis is difficult due to an
17

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
15.1. Methods The responses in the unhappiness conditions were reverse scored,
such that low scores indicate averagist tendencies and high scores
15.1.1. Participants indicate totalist tendencies. In general, responses tended to be more in
We recruited 613 US American participants online via MTurk ($0.40 line with averagism than totalism — that is, participants tended to prefer
payment per participant). 131 were excluded, leaving a final sample of not adding new moderately happy people to an already maximally
482 people (199 female, Mage = 37.68, SDage = 10.82). We aimed to happy population, but they did tend to prefer adding new moderately
recruit at least 600 participants. The sample size was set in advance unhappy people to a maximally unhappy population (see Fig. 8,
based on rough approximations of what would be needed to comfortably Table 5). Thus, mean responses in all conditions were significantly
detect the smallest effect sizes of interest; but they were not based on below the midpoint of 4. There were only three exceptions: reflection
precise power analyses. Due to the large number of excluded partici- +50 (p =.48), intuition +90 (p =.39), reflection +90 (p =.01). That is,
pants, we conducted the same analyses without any exclusions. The the only task for which responses were totalist was the +90 task in the
pattern of the results remained the same. reflection condition.
For the main analysis, we aggregated responses to each of the three
15.1.2. Procedure and materials vignettes together to form a single score per participant (α =0.86). A
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the four conditions two-way ANOVA revealed two main effects but no significant interac-
that resulted from crossing valence with thinking style. First, partici- tion effect (Fig. 9). Participants had stronger averagist tendencies when
pants were presented with the happiness scale similar to the previous asked about unhappy populations than happy populations, F(1, 478) =
studies. To ensure that they understood the scale they were also told that 21.89, p <.001, η p 2 =0.05. And they had stronger averagist tendencies
“A life above the neutral point (0) means it is a life worth living. A life when asked to rely on intuition than on reflection, F(1, 478) =7.99, p =
below the neutral point (0) means it is a life not worth living.” Next, they .005, η p 2 =0.02. The interaction between valence and thinking style was
had to indicate whether they accepted these assumptions: “I accept that not significant, F(1, 478) =0.82, p =.37, η p 2 =0.002. Tukey HSD post-
lives on negative levels, such as lives on level -100, -90, -50, or -10, are hoc tests revealed that participants were more totalist under reflection
not worth living.”, “I accept that lives on positive levels, such as lives on compared to intuition when asked about happy populations, p =.04, d
level +100, +90, +50, or +10, are worth living.”, “I do not accept the = 0.30. By contrast, when asked about unhappy populations, partici-
information provided.”. Participants who did not accept these assump- pants were not significantly more totalist under reflection compared to
tions were excluded. intuition, p =.51, d =0.21.
Next, participants were again presented with the same prompts of Only a minority of participants had strict averagist views (selecting
Study 3c to rely either on intuition or on deliberation, depending on 1) or strict totalist views (selecting 7). Across conditions, the proportion
condition assignment. Finally, participants were presented with the of participants who had strict averagist views was: 40% (±10 task), 30%
main task that consisted of three separate dilemmas presented in ran- (±50 task), 17% (±90 task). The proportion of participants who had
domized order. All three dilemmas comprised a contrast between two strict totalist views was: 7% (±10 task), 10% (±50 task), 16% (±90
populations. Civilization A always consisted of 1000 people at level task). This supports our hypothesis that most people's views are a
+100 (happiness condition), or level (cid:0) 100 (unhappiness condition), mixture of these two principles.
whereas Civilization B consisted of the same 1000 people plus an When asked explicitly in the abstract, participants said that they
additional 1000 people at more moderated happiness or unhappiness would find it good for new happy people (who lead lives that are worth
levels. The key difference between the three vignettes was that the living) to come into existence even if their lives are less intensely happy
happiness level of the additional 1000 people in civilization B was than the current average happiness level of the population (M =4.85,
varied (±10, ±50, ±90). For example, the ‘Ten’ dilemma, read as fol- SD =1.51), as revealed by a one-sample t-test against the mid-point of 4,
lows: “Consider the following two possible human civilizations: Civilization A t(236) =8.68, p <.001. By contrast, participants said that they would
contains 1,000 people of which all 1,000 people are on level +100 (extreme find it bad for new unhappy people (who lead lives that are not worth
happiness). Civilization B contains 2,000 people of which 1,000 people are living) to come into existence even if their lives are less intensely un-
on level +100 and another 1,000 people are on level +10. (Assume that this happy than the current average unhappiness level of the population (M
civilization has no issues of societal inequality because the two groups live so =3.31, SD =1.49), as revealed by a one-sample t-test against the mid-
far apart that they will never meet.). If only one civilization could come into point of 4, t(244) = (cid:0) 7.21, p < .001. Thus, in the abstract task, the
existence, which one would be better?” Participants responded on a 7-point dominant response tendency (totalism) conflicted with the dominant
scale (1 =Civilization A is much better, 4 =Both are equally good, 7 = response tendency in the concrete task (averagism). Moreover, 27% of
Civilization B is much better). participants in the happiness condition and 35% of participants in the
Next, participants responded to an attention check question that unhappiness condition gave a totalist response to the abstract question
asked how many people there were in civilization A. Participants were but an averagist response in the main task (when aggregating across the
then asked a follow-up question: “How good or bad do you think it is for three dilemmas). However, there was still some relation between the
new happy [unhappy] people (who lead lives that are [not] worth
living) to come into existence, if their lives are less intensely happy
[unhappy] than the current average happiness [unhappiness] level of Table 5
the population?” (1 =Very bad, 4 =Neither good nor bad, 7 =Very good). Mean ratings in Study 3d for comparisons between a population of 1000 people
Finally, participants responded to demographic questions. on level +100 ((cid:0) 100) and a population of 2000 people, consisting of 1000 on
level ±100 and an additional 1000 on level +10 (±50, ±90 respectively). The
responses in the unhappiness conditions were reverse scored. 1 indicates the
15.2. Results
averagist view (the population with the better average level), 4 indicates the
view that both populations are equally good, 7 indicates the totalist view (the
The reported analyses include only participants (N = 482) who
population with the better total level).
correctly responded to the check questions. 67 participants did not
Happy Unhappy
accept the premise that lives on negative levels are not worth living, as
stated at the beginning of the study. 16 participants did not accept that Intuition Reflection Intuition Reflection
lives on positive levels are worth living. 68 participants failed the Aggregated 3.33 (1.92) 3.91 (1.90) 2.73 (1.41) 3.03 (1.51)
attention check (asking how many people civilization A had). We report ±10 2.71 (2.01) 3.39 (2.11) 2.27 (1.56) 2.46 (1.75)
the same analyses with the full sample without any exclusions in the ±50 3.11 (2.17) 3.86 (2.15) 2.61 (1.67) 2.98 (1.79)
±90 4.17 (2.20) 4.48 (2.06) 3.3 (1.69) 3.65 (1.83)
Supplementary Materials. The pattern of the results is the same.
18

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
Happy Reflection Happy Intuition Unhappy Reflection Unhappy Intuition
6
4
2
±10 ±50 ±90
Fig. 9. Participants' responses to the three separate dilemmas in Study 3d, as a function of happiness (happy vs. unhappy) and thinking style (reflective vs. intuitive).
The responses in the unhappiness conditions were reverse scored. 1 indicates the averagist view (favoring the population with the better average level), 4 indicates
the view that both populations are equally good, 7 indicates the totalist view (favoring the population with the better total level).
two tasks. In both conditions, the more totalist responses were in the The results also arguably conflict with the findings of Studies 2a-b,
main task, the more totalist responses were to the abstract question which showed that people find it good to add a happy person to an
(happiness: r(235) =0.31, p <.001; unhappiness: r(243) =0.18, p = empty world and bad to add an unhappy person. If people think that it is
.004). bad to add an unhappy person to a world (or vice versa for a happy
There were no noteworthy associations with demographic measures. person), why do they favor larger populations with more unhappy peo-
In contrast to Study 3c, there were no significant differences between ple (but lower average unhappiness levels)? One difference between the
women (M =3.41, SD =1.65) and men (M =3.22, SD =1.76) in their present study and Studies 2a-b is that the level of happiness or unhap-
responses, t(571) =1.41, p =.16, d =0.11. There were also no gender piness of the additional person(s) was maximal ((cid:0) 100 or +100) in
differences when controlling for condition assignment. Studies 2a-b, whereas it was sub-maximal in the present study. Perhaps
more pertinently, the nature of the questions was different. The present
15.3. Discussion study posed a dilemma that called for participants to choose between
averagism and totalism, whereas Studies 2a-b posed no such dilemma —
The results of Study 3d demonstrate that participants showed participants were asked simply about the goodness or badness of adding
averagist tendencies for both happy and unhappy populations. That is, a single person to an empty world. In that context, averagism and
they preferred a smaller population of very happy people over a larger totalism both favor the same response. A final contrasting factor is that
population consisting of the same people and additional people that are Studies 2a-b's question was abstract and relatively context free, whereas
happy to a weaker extent. Similarly, participants preferred a larger in the present study, participants compared two populations side-by-
population consisting of very unhappy people and people that are un- side, which were described in terms of their population sizes and their
happy to a weaker extent over a smaller population consisting of only well-being distributions. It may be that with this more concrete pre-
the very unhappy people. Thus, even in an extreme case in which the sentation, people feel a greater pull towards averagism.
choice was to add an additional 1000 people whose lives come close to Supporting this last speculation, in the present study, when asked
the “absolute worst form of suffering imaginable” (e.g., (cid:0) 90) in order to explicitly in the abstract, participants indicated that they consider it
improve the average well-being of the population (e.g., (cid:0) 100), partici- good to add new happy people to a population even if this worsens the
pants tended to make this choice. average happiness level, and similarly, that it is bad to add new unhappy
In line with the findings of Study 3c, we found that when participants people to a population even if this improves the average unhappiness
are asked to rely on deliberate reflection instead of intuition, their level. That abstract response conflicts with participants' responses in the
averagist tendencies reduce. This suggests that when thinking more main task, in which they tended to favor the addition of such new
deliberately about the question, people tend to realize that focusing just people, thereby showing an averagist preference. What might cause this
on the average level has undesirable implications. Indeed, most phi- difference — that is, why would people answer the abstract question
losophers consider averagism wrong, at least in the case our study differently than the more concrete one? (For an investigation into an
covered that involved unhappiness (e.g., Greaves, 2017). In contrast to abstract/general vs concrete effect in moral judgment, see Caviola,
our hypothesis there was no interaction between thinking style (intui- Schubert, & Mogensen, 2021). One possible explanation is that people
tion vs reflection) and valence (happiness vs. unhappiness). do not perceive the questions asked in the main tasks as questions about
The present findings are in line with the results of Study 3b, which whether it is good or bad to merely add more people on top of an existing
demonstrated a tendency to apply averagism with total well-being held population (that is identical to the other population). Note that, strictly
constant. The results also tend to suggest that whereas people are sen- speaking, the questions asked in the main tasks were not about adding
sitive to total well-being when average levels are held constant (Study people to a pre-existing population but instead about comparing two
3a), they tend to apply averagism rather than totalism when these two separate populations. In this case, people may perceive and evaluate the
principles come into conflict. This is especially the case for unhappy two presented populations holistically by applying their averagist
populations. intuition to the whole population of 1000 or 2000 people respectively.
19

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
That is, their response incorporates the entire surrounding context. By management theory; Haselton & Buss, 2000). That is, negative events
contrast, when they are asked explicitly whether adding people to an tend to have greater objective impact on the health, safety, or survival of
existing population is good or bad, particularly when they are not pre- humans, than equally intense positive events: failing to avoid harmful
sented with any additional context about the overall population, people actions could lead to death, whereas failing to avoid beneficial actions
may evaluate this question by focusing solely on whether adding these doesn't have similarly bad consequences. This could explain why for
new people is good or bad. In a similar way, it may be that when people most people the worst suffering—either experienced or imagined—is
are instructed to reflect rather than rely on intuition, they dissect the more intense than the best happiness and perhaps also why some people
main task in this analytical way, focusing more on the specific difference evaluate happiness and suffering asymmetrically even when they are
between the two populations, rather than coming to a more holistic equally intense.
judgment of the entire population that results. We found no correlation between participants' current or general
mood level and their tendency to weigh suffering more than happiness.
16. General discussion However, we did find that participants who were more willing to relive
their worst day in order to experience their best day tended to weigh
Population ethics is an active field of research in philosophy but has happiness and suffering more similarly. This suggests that the way in
so far been neglected by psychologists. In this paper we provided what to which people weigh happiness and suffering for themselves personally
our knowledge is one of the first systematic psychological investigations affects their judgments of how many happy and unhappy people a
of lay people's population ethical intuitions. Our key insights across nine population should contain. Similarly, we also found that judgments
studies are the following. When people evaluate populations, they 1) about the acceptable proportion of happy and unhappy people in a
weigh suffering more than happiness, 2) do not view creating new population matched judgments about the acceptable proportion of
people as morally neutral, 3) focus on improving both the average and happiness and unhappiness within a single individual's lifetime. This
total happiness level, but seem especially sensitive to average levels, 4) again suggests that the same mechanisms drive intuitions about evalu-
tend to be more sensitive to average levels when relying on intuition ating the goodness of individual lives and whole populations (cf. Star-
than when relying on reason. We will next discuss these insights in more mans & Bloom, 2015).
detail.
16.2. Creating new people is morally relevant
16.1. Suffering is more bad than happiness is good
We found that people do not endorse the so-called intuition of
We found that people weigh suffering more than happiness when neutrality according to which creating new people with lives worth living
they evaluate the goodness of populations consisting of both happy and is morally neutral. In Studies 2a-b, participants considered a world
unhappy people. Thus, people appear to follow neither strict negative containing an additional happy person better and a world containing an
utilitarianism (minimizing suffering, giving no weight to maximizing additional unhappy person worse.
happiness at all) nor strict classical utilitarianism (minimizing suffering Moreover, we also found that people's judgments about the positive
and maximizing happiness, weighing both equally). Instead, the average value of adding a new happy person and the negative value of adding a
person's intuitions seem to track a mixture of these two theories. In new unhappy person were symmetrical. That is, their judgments did not
Studies 1a-c, participants on average believed that approximately 1.5–3 reflect the so-called asymmetry—according to which adding a new un-
times more happy people are required to outweigh a given amount of happy person is bad but adding a new happy person is neutral. It is
unhappy people. The precise trade ratio between happiness and surprising that people's judgments about adding a new happy or un-
suffering depended on the intensity levels of happiness and suffering, happy person were symmetrical given that they weighed suffering more
such that a greater proportion of happiness was required as intensity than happiness when asked about the appropriate proportion of happy
levels increased (Study 1b). (In additional preliminary studies, we found vs. unhappy people in a population in Studies 1a-c.
that the trade ratio can also heavily depend on the framing of the One possible explanation is that people reach different conclusions
question.) Study 1c clarified that, on average, participants continued to when they globally assess the final state of a population compared to
believe that more happiness than suffering was required even when the when they locally assess a change to a population. In Studies 1a-c,
happiness and suffering units were exactly equally intense. This suggests participants were asked to evaluate the acceptable happiness-to-
that people generally weigh suffering more than happiness in their suffering ratio within a given population. By contrast, in Studies 2a-b,
moral assessments, above and beyond perceiving suffering to be more participants were asked to assess whether a population improves or
intense than happiness. However, our studies also made clear that there worsens if a new happy or unhappy person is added to it. That is, par-
are individual differences and that a substantial proportion of partici- ticipants were asked to evaluate a change to a population, not its final
pants weighed happiness and suffering equally strongly, in line with state. Future research could explore this hypothesis further. Future
classical utilitarianism. research could also explore to what extent the evaluation of adding one
One explanation for why people weigh suffering more than happi- new person depends on the average or total happiness level of the pre-
ness could be a general negativity effect—the phenomenon that negative existing population.
events have a greater perceived impact than positive events have Whereas participants considered it good to add a new happy person
(Baumeister et al., 2001; Rozin & Royzman, 2001). While a negativity in Studies 2a-b, in Study 3a we found that they became less sensitive to
effect has been observed in various domains, to our knowledge, so far it the value of adding more happy people, the larger the number of people
has not been demonstrated before in moral judgments about the good- became. For example, participants preferred 10,000 happy people over
ness and badness of happiness and suffering. It is possible that a nega- 1000 happy people but they did not prefer 10 billion happy people over
tivity effect drives the asymmetric perception of the intensity of 1 billion happy people, notwithstanding the identical ratio. In contrast,
suffering and happiness. There could be neurobiological and evolu- participants remained sensitive to the disvalue of adding more unhappy
tionary reasons why people demonstrate this negativity effect and, people, even with larger numbers of people — in fact, they became more
furthermore, why some people's normative evaluation of happiness and sensitive as the numbers increased. For example, they preferred 1 billion
suffering is asymmetric even when the intensity levels of happiness and unhappy people over 10 billion unhappy people to a greater extent than
suffering are equalized (Study 1c). A possible ultimate explanation is they preferred 1000 unhappy people over 10,000 unhappy people.
that evolution has selected for mechanisms that give greater priority to One possible explanation for this pattern could be a general prefer-
avoiding suffering than pursuing happiness due to recurring asymmet- ence for populations that are not too large. For example, people may be
rical costs in the environment of evolutionary adaptation (error worried that excessively large populations could lead to negative
20

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
consequences, such as crowdedness or resource depletion. Even though We believe it is very well possible that in certain contexts, e.g., when the
we tried to rigorously control these factors, it is possible, as suggested by total level is easier to infer than the average level, people intuitively
several of our participants' comments, that many people find it difficult would focus more on the total level rather than the average level. More
to completely decontextualize the scenarios and consider the question in research is required to systematically investigate whether and to what
its pure abstract form. Thus, such a preference for populations that are extent ease-of-inference of the average and total levels of a population
not too big could play a significant role in shaping people's population impacts which criterion people focus on more when responding intui-
ethical intuitions when the population sizes are large. tively (or under deliberation).
Second, it is possible that the averagist intuition we have explored is
16.3. Both the average and the total should be improved related to the proportion dominance effect. The proportion dominance
effect is the tendency to focus on relative savings rather than the abso-
We found that people have intuitions in line with both averagism and lute savings (Baron, 1997). For example, people prefer saving 10 out of
totalism. In Study 3a, we found that participants preferred populations 10 people instead of 10 out of 100 people. This is in line with our
with better total levels when the average levels were held constant. In observed averagist tendency. It has been found that the proportion
Study 3b, we found that participants preferred populations with better dominance effect is driven by unreflective thinking (Bartels, 2006; Mata,
average levels when the total levels were held constant. In Study 3c, we 2016). This also seems in line with our finding that averagist tendencies
found that most participants' preferences lay in between the recom- are enhanced when people are prompted to think intuitively instead of
mendations of these two principles when they conflict, suggesting that reflectively (Studies 3c-d). Thus, it is possible that averagist tendencies
participants applied both preferences simultaneously in such cases. and the proportion dominance effect are driven by similar, or even the
Thus, we found that, at least in some cases, participants were willing to same, psychological processes.
trade reduced average levels to achieve improved total levels. But when Third, people may substitute (cf. attribute substitution, Kahneman &
the average levels became too low (e.g., level 50), they believed that Frederick, 2002) the difficult question of how good the distribution of
even a much greater population size and total level could not outweigh happiness of a population is with the easier question of how good the
the loss in the reduced average level. Similarly, in Study 3d, we found same distribution of happiness would be for a single individual, such as
that in certain cases where averagism and totalism conflict, participants' themselves. That is, rather than conceiving of the welfare distribution as
averagist preferences tend to dominate, suggesting that participants representing distinct people, they instead envisage it as capturing the
were particularly sensitive to differences in average levels. distribution of hedonic experiences within a single individual's life. Such
Many philosophers have rejected averagism because it leads to dis- a heuristic would only take into account the average levels of happiness
turbing implications that most consider unacceptable under careful (or the ratio between happiness and suffering) but not the population
reflection. One example is the so-called Sadistic Conclusion according to size. The fact that people have the same happiness-to-suffering trade-
which adding unhappy people can be better than adding happy people. ratios for populations as for single individuals (Studies 1a and 1c) pro-
In Study 3d, we found that people showed averagist tendencies akin to vides some support for this hypothesis.
the Sadistic Conclusion. For instance, people preferred not to add new
happy people to a population (i.e., they preferred the smaller of two 16.4. The study of axiological judgments
populations) when this would result in a lowering of its average
happiness level (despite these new people being moderately happy). Most previous research in moral psychology has focused on moral
Even more striking is the fact that people preferred to add new unhappy judgments about decision-making or acts (deontics) but not about out-
people to a population (i.e., they preferred the larger of two populations) comes per se (axiology). To our knowledge, little previous research has
when this would result in raising its average happiness level (even when explicitly focused on understanding people's axiological judgments
these new people were almost maximally unhappy). However, this does (though for one exception, see Goodwin & Landy, 2014). Our findings
not mean that people explicitly endorse averagism as a moral principle. suggest that the study of axiological judgments can reveal important
To the contrary, in the dilemmas used in Studies 3c and 3d, we found insights for moral psychology about the way in which people apply and
that people's preferences became less averagist and more totalist when integrate moral values about outcomes and moral values about decision-
they were prompted to think reflectively instead of intuitively. And making (cf. Cushman, 2013).
when asked explicitly in the abstract whether populations can be People's judgments in our studies suggest that they may be more
improved by adding more unhappy people in order to improve the willing to make utilitarian (happiness-suffering) trade-offs when
population's average level, participants rejected that view. It therefore considering just the outcomes than when considering concrete actions
seems plausible that—at least in the specific dilemmas we used in that need to be taken to achieve these outcomes. We found, for example,
studies 3c and 3d—people find it intuitive to focus on the average level that people consider world states that contain substantial amounts of
without being fully aware of its implications. Note that we are not (extreme) suffering morally net positive as long as this suffering is
claiming that these findings mean that totalism is necessarily the more outweighed by sufficient amounts of happiness (Studies 1a-b). By
rational principle than averagism. Our investigation is purely contrast, in Footbridge-like trolley problems people have the strong non-
descriptive. utilitarian intuition that it is wrong to take the action that harms one
What explains why people intuitively focus on the average level? person to help five others (Greene, 2013; Kahane et al., 2018). And more
First, focusing on the average level may be intuitive in contexts where it generally, people are often averse to applying cost-benefit analysis to
is easier to infer the average level than the total level. For example, when human lives and consider making such trade-offs taboo (Fiske & Tetlock,
populations are described by specifying the number of people, all with 1997; Tetlock, 2003). This suggests that in their axiological judgments
homogenous individual happiness levels, focusing on the average level about outcomes per se, people do apply a broadly utilitarian cost-benefit
only requires the comparison of two readily available numbers (e.g., analysis. It is only (or mostly) in their judgments about decision-making
Study 3c). By contrast, inferring the total levels requires multiplying the that they deviate from utilitarianism, e.g., due to deontological con-
number of people by the stated individual happiness level. However, straints that prohibit them from bringing about the outcome that they
when the happiness level within a population is heterogeneous, infer- consider better.
ring the average level is more difficult and may not necessarily be easier It is possible that axiological judgments and deontic judgments can
than inferring the total level (e.g., Study 3d). However, we did not diverge on population ethical issues. As a first example, in our Studies
systematically test nor control for ease-of-inference in our studies. We 1a-c we probed participants' axiological judgments about the appro-
therefore would like to emphasize that our findings do not suggest that priate trade-ratio of happiness vs. suffering in a population. That is,
intuition always favors averagism and reflection always favors totalism. participants were asked about the value of the population but not about
21

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
any specific actions. In preliminary studies, we found that participants population value was specified as reflecting the view that “it would be
gave different responses when they were asked about actions to bring better for the world to exist rather than not exist”. In Studies 2a-b,
about such populations. That is, participants were asked what the participants were asked whether one population compared to another
appropriate trade-ratio of happiness vs. suffering in a population would would be “better or worse (...) in terms of its overall value”. In Studies 3a
need to be for them to be willing to push a button that would create such and 3b, participants were asked which population they would prefer to
a population. When asked in this (deontic) way, participants stated come into existence. And in Studies 3c and 3d, participants were asked
higher trade-ratios (with more happiness being required) than when which out of two populations they think would be better to bring into
asked about the population value only (axiology). We note, however, existence. It cannot be ruled out that these different types of questions
that there could be other factors, such as framing effects, that could elicit different responses, and we hope future research tests this.
partly account for these differences. In most of our studies, participants were forced to decide which
As a second example, in Studies 2a-b we found that people had population they consider better. However, some philosophers have
symmetrical axiological judgments about the (positive vs. negative) argued that two populations could also be incommensurable (for a dis-
value of a world that included an additional happy or unhappy person. cussion, see Broome, 2005), i.e., that neither is better than the other and
But this does not rule out the possibility that they could have asym- yet nor are they exactly equally good. While in these studies we allowed
metrical deontic judgments about the action of creating a new happy or participants to indicate that they are indifferent between the two options
unhappy person. It is possible that people may consider it morally by choosing the midpoint, it is possible that some people would have
forbidden to create a new unhappy person but only morally super- instead indicated that the answer cannot be determined. In Study 2b, we
erogatory—good but not required—to create a new happy person. tried to address this question by allowing participants to select an option
Future research could explore this possibility. stating that they consider the question nonsensical or that they don't
Similarly, to discuss a case outside population ethics, most people know how to answer it. We found that less than 2% chose that option,
likely agree that a world in which one person suffers is better than a weakening this concern. However, since we did not offer this option in
world in which five people suffer. But if the better outcome can only be all studies, it is still possible that some participants consider it too
brought about by actively harming one person (e.g., by pushing them off difficult or impossible to respond to tricky population ethical questions.
a footbridge), they might consider that action wrong despite their Another possibility is that the availability of an option stating that they
preference for the outcome in which fewer people suffer. More research consider the question nonsensical or that they don't know how to answer
is required to investigate the relation of deontic and axiological judg- it did not allow subjects an appropriate means by which to express the
ments in general and people's deontic judgments about population judgment that the outcomes are incommensurable, as this need not
ethical questions in particular. entail dismissing the question as meaningless. For example, according to
Chang (2002), two items may be evaluatively comparable without it
16.5. Limitations being the case that one must be better than the other or else they must be
equally good. Chang claims that there exists a fourth possible relation of
In our studies, we focused only on manipulating hedonic welfare, i. value comparability, which she calls ‘being on a par’. Future research
e., happiness and suffering, between populations. While people clearly could explore this further.
take into account hedonic welfare when making population value
judgments, it is likely that they also believe other aspects of people's 16.6. Future research
lives to have intrinsic value. For example, they might think that Van
Gogh's life was worth living, notwithstanding that he arguably experi- Our studies primarily focused on demonstrating people's general
enced a net negative balance of suffering to happiness. That is, they tendencies to prefer one population over another. Future research could
would not wish, for his sake, that he had never been born, because he investigate in greater detail what psychological mechanisms drive
also achieved artistic excellence and accomplished extraordinary things. people's population ethical tendencies. For example, future research
Thus, it could be that people assume that lives have other features that could test our hypothesis that the averagist tendency is driven by a
make life worth living, such as achievement of perfectionist value of the heuristic that substitutes the population ethical question with the
kind that lives like Van Gogh's have in very high degrees (Bradford, question of how good an individual life within the given happiness
2015). In such cases, the balance of suffering to happiness would have to distribution would be. Future research could also investigate the
be strongly asymmetric for the individual life not to be worth living. Our mechanisms that drive people to have asymmetrical judgments when
studies did not take such non-welfare values into account. evaluating populations with fixed sizes consisting of both happy and
In our studies, participants were presented with the explicit or im- unhappy people but symmetrical judgments when evaluating whether a
plicit assumption that there is a happiness scale, ranging from (cid:0) 100 population improves or worsens when happy or unhappy people are
(extreme suffering), to 0 (neutral), to +100 (extreme happiness). added.
However, we acknowledge that it is not obvious whether such an We found that people have both averagist and totalist preferences
objective scale exists. Instead, such a scale may rather reflect subjective and that they apply them simultaneously when both the average and
estimates that can differ between people. A happiness scale might thus total levels vary. This implies that people somehow must make inter-
not be analogous to objective scales, such as those that assess mass, but theoretic comparisons between averagism and totalism. That is, they
rather, analogous to subjective scales, such as those that assess beauty or must intuitively trade the relative utility gains of one principle against
taste. Due to the subjectivity of perception regarding the evaluation of the relative utility loss of the other principle. How precisely this is done
happiness and suffering it is unclear how exactly participants inter- is not clear. Philosophers have discussed various approaches to inter-
preted the happiness scale they were presented with. It is, for example, theoretic comparisons, such as the normalization of theories based on
unclear whether people accept and converge on the view that there is a their variance (Greaves, 2017; MacAskill, 2014; MacAskill, Cotton-
neutral happiness point at which life is neither worth living nor not Barratt, & Ord, 2020). Future research could investigate how people
worth living. Despite these uncertainties, our results, including partici- make such intuitive intertheoretic comparisons.
pants' comments in the open text fields, do not suggest that they objected How do people aggregate vast amounts of small units together? A
to the presented happiness scale. famous example is the so-called Repugnant Conclusion (Parfit, 1984).
As explained in the Introduction section, our studies relied on Do people think that there is a number of slightly happy people—who
different questions and response scales to assess participants' population are all on level +1—that is large enough for this population to be overall
ethical intuitions. In Studies 1a-c and Studies 2a-b, participants were better than a smaller population of people who are all on level +100?
asked about overall population value. In Studies 1a-c, a positive overall Even though we did not directly test this, our results of Study 3c suggest
22

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
that people would likely not think that such a number exists. Credit author statement
16.7. Implications LC conceptualized the project. LC, DA, ALM, and GPG planned the
studies. LC and DA collected and analyzed the data. LC, DA, ALM, and
We found that people's population ethical judgments about concrete GPG interpreted the data. LC wrote the first draft. LC, DA, ALM, and GPG
cases are influenced by different intuitions, which do not always square wrote the manuscript.
with judgments made under careful reflection. For example, we found
that most participants believed that more happy than unhappy people Author note
are required for a population to be net positive (Studies 1a-c), yet most
participants made symmetrical judgments regarding the goodness of Reports of all measures, manipulations, and exclusions, as well as all
adding a new happy person or the badness of adding a new unhappy data, analysis code, and experimental materials are available for
person (Studies 2a-b). And while participants found it good to add a new download at https://osf.io/qt65w/.
happy person, the perceived marginal value of adding a new happy (or
unhappy) person declined when populations got very large (Study 3a). Acknowledgments
And even more disturbingly, participants preferred populations with
better average levels even if this meant that those populations contained We thank Carl Shulman, Joshua Lewis, Pablo Stafforini, William
additional people experiencing torture-like suffering on level (cid:0) 90. MacAskill and the attendees of the Global Priorities Research Workshop
These are examples in which people's judgments appear unreasonable for their valuable inputs. This research was funded by Effective Altruism
and at odds with most philosophers' views (and possibly even their own Funds and the Center on Long-Term Risk.
more carefully considered views). They demonstrate that caution is
warranted when drawing normative conclusions directly from lay peo- References
ple's population ethical intuitions.
However, this does not mean that it is not valuable to examine lay Arrhenius, G. (2000). An impossibility theorem for welfarist axiologies. Economics and
Philosophy, 16(2), 247–266.
people's population ethical intuitions. Population ethics has important
Baron, J. (1997). Confusion of relative and absolute risk in valuation. Journal of Risk and
implications for policy making and global priority setting. Philosophers Uncertainty, 14(3), 301–309.
often rely on their own intuitions when discussing population ethics. An Bartels, D. M. (2006). Proportion dominance: The generality and variability of favoring
relative savings over absolute savings. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
understanding of the psychology of these population ethical intuitions
Processes, 100(1), 76–95.
can therefore be informative. For example, greater awareness of the Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Finkenauer, C., & Vohs, K. D. (2001). Bad is stronger
specific psychological mechanisms and biases driving these intuitions than good. Review of General Psychology, 5(4), 323–370.
Bealer, G. (1998). Intuition and the autonomy of philosophy. Rethinking Intuition (pp.
could elucidate which ones should be endorsed under reflection and
201–240). Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
which ones not. The apparent inconsistencies between some of these Beckstead, N. (2013). On the overwhelming importance of shaping the far future. Doctoral
intuitions demonstrate that it may be impossible to formulate a popu- dissertation. Rutgers University-Graduate School-New Brunswick.
lation ethical theory that is both consistent and intuitive (cf. impossi- Birnbaum, M. H. (1972). Morality judgments: Tests of an averaging model. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 93(1), 35.
bility theorems; Arrhenius, 2000). One possible solution could be a Birnbaum, M. H. (1973). Morality judgment: Test of an averaging model with differential
debunking approach: attempting to understand the psychological un- weights. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 99(3), 395.
derpinnings of different philosophical positions, with an eye to identi- Biswas-Diener, R., & Diener, E. (2009). Making the best of a bad situation: Satisfaction in
the slums of Calcutta. In Culture and well-being (pp. 261–278). Dordrecht: Springer.
fying those that result from unreliable or biased cognitive processes.
Bostrom, N. (2013). Existential risk prevention as global priority. Global Policy, 4(1),
This in turn allows the resolution of inconsistency by discounting certain 15–31.
intuitions as untrustworthy (cf. Greene, 2013). Another possible reso- Bradford, G. (2015). Perfectionism. In The Routledge handbook of philosophy of well-being
(pp. 140–150). London, UK: Routledge.
lution is to accept the fact that we are internally conflicted and, as a
Broome, J. (2004). Weighing lives. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
consequence, uncertain which moral theory is right (MacAskill, Bykvist, Broome, J (2005). Should we value population? The Journal of Political Philosophy, 13(4),
& Ord, 2020). 399–413.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Berntson, G. G. (1994). Relationship between attitudes and evaluative
Despite the fact that people's population ethical intuitions can be
space_ A critical review, with emphasis on the separability of positive and negative
biased and inconsistent, we found some response patterns that appear to substrates. Psychological Bulletin, 115(3), 401.
be relatively robust. Participants were generally sensitive to the total Cappelen, H. (2012). Philosophy without intuitions. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Caviola, L., Schubert, S., & Mogensen, A. (2021). Should you save the more useful? The
amount of happiness and unhappiness the world contains, and in most
effect of generality on moral judgments about rescue and indirect effects. Cognition,
cases they considered creating new happy people morally good and new 206, 104501.
unhappy people morally bad. We also found that, at least in our di- Chang, R. (2002). The possibility of parity. Ethics, 112(4), 659–688.
lemmas, people's responses became more in line with totalism when Chudnoff, E. (2013). Intuition. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Cushman, F. (2013). Action, outcome, and value: A dual-system framework for morality.
they thought more reflectively about their answers. While it is too early Personality and Social Psychology Review, 17(3), 273–292.
to draw any practical ethical implications from these findings, they Desvousges, William, Johnson Reed, F., Dunford, Richard, Boyle, Kevin, Hudson, Sara,
suggest that many people, especially after more careful reflection, may Wilson, Nicole, et al. (1992). Measuring Nonuse Damages Using Contingent Valuation:
An Experimental Evaluation of Accuracy. NC: Research Triangle Institute.
be supportive of a broadly totalist position, according to which vast
Diener, E., & Diener, C. (1996). Most people are happy. Psychological Science, 7(3),
numbers of (un)happy people would be extremely (un)desirable. Given 181–185.
that the number of people who could come into existence in the future Diener, E., Oishi, S., & Tay, L. (2018). Advances in subjective well-being research. Nature
Human Behaviour, 2(4), 253–260.
vastly outnumbers the number of currently existing generations
Fetherstonhaugh, D., Slovic, P., Johnson, S., & Friedrich, J. (1997). Insensitivity to the
(Hauser, Rand, Peysakhovich, & Nowak, 2014), this position implies value of human life: A study of psychophysical numbing. Journal of Risk and
that future generations should be weighed much more heavily in our Uncertainty, 14(3), 283–300.
Fiore, J., Becker, J., & Coppel, D. B. (1983). Social network interactions: A buffer or a
moral decision making than they currently are (Beckstead, 2013; Bos-
stress. American Journal of Community Psychology, 11(4), 423–439.
trom, 2013; Greaves & MacAskill, 2019; Mogensen, 2021; Ord, 2020; Fiske, A. P., & Tetlock, P. E. (1997). Taboo trade-offs: Reactions to transactions that
Parfit, 2011, section 36). Future research could investigate to what transgress the spheres of justice. Political Psychology, 18(2), 255–297.
Frederick, S., & Fischhoff, B. (1998). Scope (in) sensitivity in elicited valuations. Risk
extent lay people endorse these practical implications that may follow
Decision and Policy, 3(2), 109–123.
from their population ethical values. Frick, J. D. (2014). “Making people happy, not making happy People”: A Defense of the
asymmetry intuition in population ethics (doctoral dissertation). Cambridge, MA, USA:
Harvard University.
23

L. Caviola et al. C o g n i t i o n 218(2022)104941
Goodwin, G. P., & Landy, J. F. (2014). Valuing different human lives. Journal of Manne, S. L., Taylor, K. L., Dougherty, J., & Kemeny, N. (1997). Supportive and negative
Experimental Psychology: General, 143(2), 778. responses in the partner relationship: Their association with psychological
Greaves, H. (2017). Population axiology. Philosophy Compass, 12(11), Article e12442. adjustment among individuals with cancer. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 20(2),
Greaves, H., & MacAskill, W. (2019). The case for strong longtermism. Global Priorities 101–125.
Institute Working Paper. Mata, A. (2016). Proportion dominance in valuing lives: The role of deliberative
Greaves, H., MacAskill, W., O’Keeffe-O’Donovan, R., Trammell, P., Tereick, B., thinking. Judgment and Decision making, 11(5), 441–448.
Mogensen, A., … Herrmann, S. (2020). A research agenda for the Global Priorities McMahan, J. (1981). Problems of population choice. Ethics, 92(1), 96–127.
Institute. Global Priorities Institute. https://globalprioritiesinstitute.org/research Mogensen, A. L. (2021). Moral demands and the far future. Philosophy and
-agenda/. Phenomenological Research, Article forthcoming.
Greene, J. D. (2013). Moral tribes: Emotion, reason, and the gap between us and them. New MacAskill, W. (2014). Normative uncertainty. University of Oxford: Doctoral dissertation.
York, USA: Penguin. Narveson, J. (1973). Moral problems of population. The Monist, 57(1), 62–86.
Greene, J. D., Sommerville, R. B., Nystrom, L. E., Darley, J. M., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An Nebel, J. M. (2019). Asymmetries in the value of existence. Philosophical Perspectives, 33
fMRI investigation of emotional engagement in moral judgment. Science, 293(5537), (1), 126–145.
2105–2108. Ng, Yew-Kwang (1989). What should we do about future generations? Impossibility of
Hardin, G. (1968). The tragedy of the commons: the population problem has no technical Parfit’s Theory X. Economics and Philosophy, 5(2), 235–253. https://doi.org/
solution; it requires a fundamental extension in morality. Science, 162(3859), 10.1017/S0266267100002406
1243–1248. Nozick, Robert (1974). Anarchy, State, and Utopia (pp. 42–45). New York: Basic Books.
Haselton, M. G., & Buss, D. M. (2000). Error management theory: A new perspective on Ord, T. (2020). The precipice: existential risk and the future of humanity. New York, NY:
biases in cross-sex mind reading. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78(1), Hachette Books.
81. Parfit, D. (1984). Reasons and persons. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Hauser, O. P., Rand, D. G., Peysakhovich, A., & Nowak, M. A. (2014). Cooperating with Parfit, D. (2011). On what matters: Volume two. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
the future. Nature, 511(7508), 220–223. Peeters, G., & Czapinski, J. (1990). Positive-negative asymmetry in evaluations: The
Holtug, N. (2004). Person-affecting moralities. In The repugnant conclusion (pp. 129–161). distinction between affective and informational negativity effects. European Review
Dordrecht, NL: Springer. of Social Psychology, 1(1), 33–60.
Hsee, C. K., & Zhang, J. (2010). General evaluability theory. Perspectives on Psychological Riskey, D. R., & Birnbaum, M. H. (1974). Compensatory effects in moral judgment: Two
Science, 5(4), 343–355. rights don’t make up for a wrong. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 103(1), 171.
Huemer, M. (2005). In Ethical intuitionism. London: Palgrave Macmillan. Roser, Max, & Ortiz-Ospina, Esteban (2020). Global Extreme Poverty. OurWorldInData.
Hurka, T. (1983). Value and population size. Ethics, 93(3), 496–507. org. https://ourworldindata.org/extreme-poverty.
Hurka, T. (2010). Asymmetries in value. Nˆous, 44(2), 199–223. Rozin, P., & Royzman, E. B. (2001). Negativity bias, negativity dominance, and
Ito, T. A., Larsen, J. T., Smith, N. K., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1998). Negative information contagion. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 5(4), 296–320.
weighs more heavily on the brain: The negativity bias in evaluative categorizations. Schubert, S., Caviola, L., & Faber, N. S. (2019). The psychology of existential risk: Moral
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75(4), 887–900. judgments about human extinction. Scientific reports, 9(1), 1–8.
Kahane, G., Everett, J. A., Earp, B. D., Caviola, L., Faber, N. S., Crockett, M. J., & Sidgwick, H. (1981/1907). Methods of ethics (7th Revised ed.). Indianapolis, Indiana:
Savulescu, J. (2018). Beyond sacrificial harm: A two-dimensional model of Hackett Publishing Co, Inc.
utilitarian psychology. Psychological Review, 125(2), 131. Spears, D. (2017). Making people happy or making happy people? Questionnaire-
Kahneman, D., & Frederick, S. (2002). Representativeness revisited: Attribute experimental studies of population ethics and policy. Social Choice and Welfare, 49
substitution in intuitive judgment. Heuristics and biases: The psychology of intuitive (1), 145–169.
judgment, 49, 81. Spears, D. (2019). The asymmetry of population ethics: Experimental social choice and
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decisions under risk. dual-process moral reasoning. Economics and Philosophy, 1–20.
Econometrica, 47, 263–291. Starmans, C., & Bloom, P. (2015). A series of separate selves: Happiness distributions across a
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1984). Choices, values, and frames. American Psychologist, lifespan mirror happiness distributions across a group. Yale University.
39(4), 341–350. Tappin, B. M., & Capraro, V. (2018). Doing good vs. avoiding bad in prosocial choice: A
Lewis, D. (1983). Philosophical papers volume I. New York, USA: Oxford University Press. refined test and extension of the morality preference hypothesis. Journal of
MacAskill, W., Bykvist, K., & Ord, T. (2020). Moral uncertainty. Oxford, UK: Oxford Experimental Social Psychology, 79, 64–70.
University Press. Tetlock, P. E. (2003). Thinking the unthinkable: Sacred values and taboo cognitions.
MacAskill, W., Cotton-Barratt, O., & Ord, T. (2020). Statistical normalization methods in Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(7), 320–324.
interpersonal and Intertheoretic comparisons. The Journal of Philosophy, 117(2),
61–95.
24