NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE GOVERNANCE OF NON-PROFITS AND THEIR SOCIAL IMPACT:
EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED PROGRAM IN HEALTHCARE
IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO
Anicet Fangwa
Caroline Flammer
Marieke Huysentruyt
Bertrand Quelin
Working Paper 30391
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30391
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2022, Revised February 2023
We are grateful to the Editor (Lamar Pierce), an anonymous Associate Editor, three anonymous
reviewers, as well as Ruth Aguilera, Dominique Baabo Kubuya, Marco Becht, Vanessa Burbano,
Olga Hawn, Natasha Hochberg, David Levine (AEA discussant) Steve Lydenberg, Serge Mayaka,
Mary-Hunter McDonnell, Agnes Muzama, Ivan Png, Gui Deng Say, David Stolow, Haitao Yu, as
well as seminar participants at Boston University, Cornell University, Erasmus University, Georgia
Institute of Technology, George Mason University, HEC Paris, IESE, Ivey, Lancaster University,
Singapore Management University, Toulouse School of Economics, UCLA, University of
Manchester, University of Zurich, UT Austin, the AEA Meetings (New Orleans), the Ackerman
Corporate Governance Conference (Tel Aviv), the Swiss Economists Abroad Conference
(Geneva), and the Strategic Management Society Annual Conference (Minnesota) for helpful
comments and suggestions. We thank the DRC’s Ministry of Health, the PDSS coordination team,
and Bluesquare for providing us with the data as well as their help and insights. This research is
supported by a grant of the French National Research Agency (ANR) “Investissements
d’Avenir” (LabEx Ecodec). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2022 by Anicet Fangwa, Caroline Flammer, Marieke Huysentruyt, and Bertrand Quelin. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Governance of Non-Profits and their Social Impact: Evidence from a Randomized Program
in Healthcare in the Democratic Republic of Congo
Anicet Fangwa, Caroline Flammer, Marieke Huysentruyt, and Bertrand Quelin
NBER Working Paper No. 30391
August 2022, Revised February 2023
JEL No. I0,I1,I2,O1
ABSTRACT
Substantial funding is provided to the healthcare systems of low-income countries. However, an
important challenge is to ensure that this funding be used efficiently. This challenge is complicated
by the fact that a large share of healthcare services in low-income countries is provided by non-
profit health centers that often lack i) effective governance structures and ii) organizational know-
how and adequate training. In this paper, we argue that the bundling of performance-based
incentives with auditing and feedback (A&F) is a potential way to overcome these obstacles. First,
the combination of feedback and performance-based incentives—that is, feedback joint with
incentives to act on this feedback and achieve specific health outcomes—helps address the
knowledge gap that may otherwise undermine performance-based incentives. Second, coupling
feedback with auditing helps ensure that the information underlying the feedback is reliable—a
prerequisite for effective feedback. To examine the effectiveness of this bundle, we use data from a
randomized governance program conducted in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Within the
program, a set of health centers were randomly assigned to a “governance treatment” that consisted
of performance-based incentives combined with A&F, while others were not. Consistent with our
prediction, we find that the governance treatment led to i) higher operating efficiency and ii)
improvements in health outcomes. Furthermore, we find that funding is not a substitute for the
governance treatment—health centers that only receive funding increase their scale, but do not
show improvements in operating efficiency nor health outcomes.
Anicet Fangwa Marieke Huysentruyt
HEC Paris HEC Paris
1 Rue de la Libération 1 Rue de la Libération
78350 Jouy-en-Josas 78350 Jouy-en-Josas
France France
anicet.fangwa@hec.edu huysentruyt@hec.fr
Caroline Flammer Bertrand Quelin
School of International and Public Affairs HEC Paris
Columbia University 1 Rue de la Libération
420 West 118th Street, Office 1429 78350 Jouy-en-Josas
New York, NY 10026 France
and NBER quelin@hec.fr
caroline.flammer@columbia.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w30391

1.Introduction
Over the past decades, large amounts of funding have been dedicated to the improvement of national
healthcare systems in low-income countries such as the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). However,
the recent literature has questioned the effectiveness of these funds—which are typically provided in the
form of lump-sum transfers or performance-based financing—in improving the quality of healthcare
services (e.g., Eichler and Levine 2009, Huillery and Seban 2021, Linden and Shastry 2012, Miller and
Babiarz 2013, Paul et al. 2018). In this regard, an important challenge is the fact that a large share of
healthcare services in low-income countries is provided by non-profit health centers that often lack effective
governance structures, organizational know-how, and adequately trained staff.1
In this paper, we examine potential governance mechanisms through which non-profit health
centers in low-income countries can mitigate these obstacles and ultimately improve the quality of their
services. Specifically, we propose that the bundling of i) performance-based funding and ii) auditing and
feedback (A&F) is a way to address these obstacles. The rationale is as follows. First, the sole use of
performance-based funding is unlikely to be effective if the non-profit’s employees lack the necessary
knowledge on how to improve the organization’s operations, and may even backfire if the non-profit’s
employees feel overwhelmed by the performance targets. As we argue in this paper, the combination of
performance-based incentives and feedback—that is, feedback joint with incentives to act on this feedback
and achieve specific health outcomes—helps address the knowledge gap that may otherwise undermine
performance-based incentives. Moreover, the provision of effective feedback requires reliable
information—another important challenge in low-income countries (e.g., Kerber et al. 2015, Kumar et al.
2022)—which can be addressed by further combining feedback with auditing.
1 These obstacles are commonly seen as a critical threat to the development of viable healthcare systems in low-income
countries (e.g., WHO 2021, World Bank 2018). For example, in their study of the governance practices of healthcare
facilities in low- and middle-income countries, Saif-Ur-Rahman et al. (2019) document a large “governance gap,”
highlighting that “[g]overnance is one of the most important aspects for strong primary healthcare (PHC) service
delivery. To achieve the targets for the Sustainable Development Goals, good governance may play a prime role in
low-income and middle-income countries” (p. 1).
1

By considering the bundling of performance-based funding with A&F, we contribute to the
literature that studies the design of effective governance practices. Researchers in economics, strategy, and
organization have long studied how different governance practices can improve firm performance (for
reviews of this literature, see Aguilera et al. 2016, Bebchuk and Weisbach 2010, Becht, Bolton, and Roell
2003). However, this literature offers only limited guidance in our context, as it focuses primarily on the
governance practices of for-profit organizations in high-income countries, which need not be effective for
non-profits in low-income countries. For example, the different objective function of non-profits, along
with the lack of organizational know-how, adequately trained employees, and verifiable information may
undermine the use of traditional governance tools. And indeed, the existing literature finds that
performance-based funding is ineffective in improving—and sometimes even reduces—the quality of
healthcare services in low-income countries (e.g., Basinga et al. 2011, Huillery and Seban 2021, Linden
and Shastry 2012, Mayaka et al. 2011).2 This is puzzling and underscores the challenge of how to think
about and design effective governance mechanisms for non-profits in low-income countries. As we argue,
a potential remedy is to combine performance-based funding with other, complementary provisions—
namely auditing and feedback—that take into account the nature of non-profits and the specific challenges
that they face in low-income countries. In this regard, our paper echoes Milgrom and Roberts’ (1988, 1990,
1995) insight that business practices can be substantially enhanced when complementarities exist between
these practices.
To empirically examine whether the bundling of performance-based funding with A&F can
improve health outcomes in low-income countries, we use detailed micro data obtained from a randomized
governance program that was conducted by the World Bank in the DRC’s healthcare sector. This program,
which aimed to increase the quantity and quality of primary healthcare services—and especially maternity
and childbirth services—was administered in about 1,000 health centers starting at the beginning of 2017.
2 A similar conclusion was reached by practitioners. For example, a recent report of the Independent Evaluation Group
(IEG) of the World Bank highlights the disappointing results of performance-based funding in the healthcare sector
of low-income countries (IEG 2014). See also the related discussion in Paul et al. (2018).
2

Health centers in the program were randomly assigned to a treatment group and control group, respectively.
While health centers in both groups received funding from the program, only those in the treatment group
were subject to a “governance treatment” consisting of performance-based incentives combined with A&F.
Hence, by design, this randomized governance program provides an ideal setup to study how this bundle
of governance practices affects health centers’ outcomes (e.g., their operating efficiency and service
quality), holding everything else, including funding, constant.3
Using a difference-in-differences methodology, we find that, within a ten-quarter period following
the treatment, health centers in the treatment group experience significant improvements in both operating
efficiency (captured by an increase in the number of services provided per employee) and health outcomes
(captured by a reduction in the probability of stillbirths and neonatal deaths, respectively). These findings
indicate that the intervention—that is, the bundling of performance-based funding with A&F—helps the
treated health centers improve their operating efficiency and increase the quality of their services.
To shed light on the mechanism, we conduct a series of interviews with program participants.
Collectively, the respondents highlighted that a key challenge was the lack of adequate training and
organizational know-how. In this regard, the quarterly rounds of feedback—combined with incentives to
actually act on this feedback and achieve specific health outcomes—were seen as essential in inducing
tangible changes that would ultimately translate into higher efficiency and quality of services. Overall, our
interviews suggest that combining learning with incentives to implement what is learnt is a plausible
mechanism underlying our findings.4
3 Note that we refer to the intervention as a “governance treatment,” since the intervention explicitly aims to align the
interests of the health center’s staff toward the health center’s objective, that is, the common social goal of improving
the quality and quantity of health services. This is in line with the way governance is typically defined in the literature.
For example, in their textbook, Hanson et al. (2017, p. 292) define governance as “the set of mechanisms used to
manage the relationship among stakeholders and to determine and control the strategic direction and performance of
organisations.” That being said, while the components of the intervention can be seen as governance practices, they
can also be construed as management practices, as they directly affect the way the health centers’ daily operations are
conducted. Similarly, in their discussion of the role of governance vs. management practices in the healthcare sector,
the Governance Institute (2018) notes that “[t]he line between governance and management can sometimes blur. In
fact, we believe there is no real ‘line’ between the two” (p. 1).
4 In auxiliary analyses, we find further evidence that points toward the importance of learning. Specifically, we find
that the treatment effect is stronger in areas with a lower density of health centers (that is, areas where it is harder to
3

In addition, to gain insights into what happened within the “black box” of the treated health centers,
we use finer-grained data that track the evolution of several quality scores that were collected as part of the
auditing. Three patterns emerge from this analysis. First, the largest improvements are found in the
categories planning, financial management, and general organization. These improvements provide a
plausible rationale for the increase in operating efficiency. Second, we also observe large improvements in
the categories maternity care, pre-natal care, and family planning. These categories are all directly related
to maternal and childhood health. As such, they potentially explain the reduction in infant mortality. Third,
these improvements tend to materialize within the initial quarters of the program and remain somewhat
stable thereafter. This is again consistent with the learning interpretation, in which the initial quarters of the
program are essentially a learning phase that subsequently translates into higher operating efficiency and
lower infant mortality.
Finally, in auxiliary analyses, we examine whether funding can serve as a substitute for the
governance treatment. This question is not only important from a societal perspective but also from an
implementation and policy perspective. Indeed, transferring money is relatively straightforward, while it is
more challenging to implement better governance and management practices. To shed light on this question,
we compare health centers in- and outside the governance program. We refer to the latter group as the
“outside group.” Unlike the treatment group (i.e., health centers that receive both funding and the
governance treatment) and the control group (i.e., health centers that only receive funding), health centers
in the outside group receive neither. Accordingly, by comparing the treatment group versus the outside
group, we can estimate the impact of the combination of ‘funding and governance’ on health center
outcomes. Similarly, by comparing the control group versus the outside group, we can measure the impact
of ‘funding’ as standalone. This analysis reveals that funding is not a substitute for the governance
treatment—health centers that only receive funding increase their scale, but do not show improvements in
learn and adopt best practices from one’s peers). Moreover, we find that i) the increase in operating efficiency is higher
for health centers with lower ex ante operating efficiency, and ii) the decrease in infant mortality is more pronounced
for health centers with higher ex ante mortality. Taken together, these findings indicate that the improvements brought
about by the treatment are larger when there is more to improve and learn to begin with.
4

operating efficiency nor service quality. In contrast, health centers that receive both funding and the
governance treatment improve both their scale as well as their operating efficiency and service quality.
Naturally, we caution that our findings are specific to the healthcare sector in a low-income country,
and hence need not generalize to other settings. Nevertheless, studying this specific context is important,
as improving children’s health has been an important challenge in low-income countries. According to the
World Health Organization (WHO), the mortality rate of children under the age of five decreased from
9.3% (i.e., 93 deaths per 1,000 live births) in 1990, to 3.9% in 2017 (WHO 2018). This corresponds to a
worldwide decline from 12.6 million deaths in 1990, to 5.4 million in 2017. Yet, despite this overall
progress, stark disparities exist across regions and countries. In particular, Sub-Saharan Africa remains the
region with the highest under-5 mortality rate in the world, with one child in thirteen dying before their
fifth birthday—this is fourteen times higher than in high-income countries (WHO 2018). A similar picture
arises with the mortality rate of infants under one-year old. In particular, the DRC is among the countries
with the highest infant mortality rates in the world. An estimated 7% of infants died within the first year of
their life in 2017, compared to 0.4% in France and 0.6% in the U.S. (United Nations 2018). Reducing
children mortality is of foremost importance, and this study helps inform how specific governance practices
can contribute to this objective.
Our study makes several contributions to the literature. First, it contributes to the governance
literature by exploring how the bundling of performance-based funding and A&F can increase the
effectiveness of non-profit organizations in low-income countries. Second, it adds to the literature on the
“bundling” of business practices, highlighting how performance-based funding and A&F can complement
each other in addressing the key obstacles faced by non-profit health centers in low-income countries. Third,
it advances the literature that studies the effectiveness of performance-based incentives in low-income
countries, and provides a potential explanation for their limited effectiveness, along with a potential
remedy.5
5 In Section 7, we elaborate on these contributions and discuss the related literature.
5

2. Theoretical background
The challenge of designing effective governance practices for non-profits in low-income countries
A large literature examines how different governance practices can improve the performance of for-profit
organizations in high-income countries (e.g., Aguilera et al. 2016, Bebchuk and Weisbach 2010, Becht,
Bolton, and Roell 2003). While related, the insights from this literature need not generalize to non-profits
in low-income countries. Indeed, in order to be effective, appropriate governance practices need to take into
account the unique nature of non-profits in low-income countries and the obstacles that they face. First,
unlike for-profit organizations, non-profits aim to maximize their social impact (such as better health
outcomes) as opposed to financial performance. Accordingly, traditional governance mechanisms—such
as pay-for-financial performance or profit-sharing—may not be suitable, as they are not necessarily aligned
with the non-profits’ objectives (Glaeser 2002, Hansmann 1980). Second, non-profit employees are often
purpose-driven and intrinsically motivated. As such, they are likely less responsive to extrinsic incentives
(Leete 2000). In fact, the provision of extrinsic incentives could even crowd out their intrinsic motivation
and ultimately hurt the non-profit’s objective.6 Third, non-profits in low-income countries operate in an
environment that is resource constrained. In particular, their managers and employees may lack the
necessary knowledge on how to improve the organizations’ operations.7
As a way to mitigate these challenges, a potentially appealing incentive mechanism is the provision
of performance-based funding, in which non-profit organizations receive additional funding conditional on
meeting specific social goals (e.g., specific health outcomes). As such, performance-based funding differs
from the more traditional pay-for-financial performance incentives in two ways: i) the additional funding
is tied to social criteria in lieu of financial criteria, and ii) the direct beneficiary is the non-profit organization
6 This argument echoes the findings of studies in the context of for-profit organizations that highlight a potential “dark
side” of financial performance-based incentives, in that such incentives can potentially crowd out the employee’s
intrinsic motivation and ultimately reduce their engagement and job satisfaction (e.g., Bowles 2016, Cassar and Meier
2021, Gubler, Larkin, and Pierce 2016, Wrzesniewski et al. 2014).
7 For example, in the context of the DRC’s healthcare sector, the WHO has identified several sources of inefficiencies
such as the lack of strategic and managerial planning, inadequate priorities in resource allocation, lack of managerial
competencies, and insufficient medical training of health workers (WHO 2015).
6

itself as opposed to the managers and employees, respectively.
The provision of performance-based funding is appealing, as it is aligned with the non-profit’s
social objective, and may motivate the non-profit’s managers and employees in two ways. First, by
providing such incentives, non-profits can leverage their managers’ and employees’ intrinsic motivation to
obtain additional funding for the non-profit’s cause.8 Second, performance-based funding may provide
benefits to the managers and employees. Indeed, the additional funding allows non-profit organizations to,
e.g., upgrade their equipment, provide training to their employees, pay higher wages, extend the scope of
their services, all of which increase the attractiveness of the workplace and, as a result, can have a
motivational effect on individuals’ work behavior.9 On top of the motivational aspect, providing employees
and managers with training, upgraded equipment, etc., may empower them to further increase their
productivity.
While the use of performance-based funding is appealing from a theoretical perspective, the
empirical literature finds that performance-based funding tends to be ineffective in low-income countries
(e.g., Eichler and Levine 2009, Linden and Shastry 2012, Miller and Babiarz 2013). In fact, previous studies
find that performance-based funding can even reduce the quality of healthcare services in low-income
countries (e.g., Huillery and Seban 2021). This is puzzling and underscores the challenge of how to think
about and design effective governance mechanisms for non-profits in low-income countries.
A potential explanation for the ineffectiveness of performance-based funding could be the lack of
adequate training and organizational know-how in low-income countries. Arguably, the provision of
performance-based funding may overwhelm and demotivate employees who lack the necessary knowledge
to improve the non-profit’s performance, which in turn could hurt (rather than improve) their performance
8 Relatedly, recent studies in the context of for-profits in high-income countries have shown that employees across
various occupations (e.g., consultants, lawyers, and online workers) are willing to forgo financial compensation for
the pursuit of “meaningful” work (e.g., Bode and Singh 2018, Burbano 2016, Carnahan, Kryscynski, and Olson 2017,
Cassar 2019, Cassar and Meier 2018).
9 In a similar spirit, non-financial benefits awarded to employees (e.g., through employer recognition, social visibility,
or employee satisfaction programs) are found to motivate employees and improve their productivity (e.g., Ashraf,
Bandiera, and Jack 2014, Ashraf, Bandiera, and Lee 2014, Dur, Non, and Roelfsema 2010, Flammer and Luo 2017,
Gallus and Frey 2016, Gubler, Larkin, and Pierce 2017).
7

(Huillery and Seban 2021). Moreover, compared to financial performance metrics, non-financial
performance metrics are difficult to measure and hence likely less suitable as a basis for performance-based
incentives.10 They might also be subject to manipulations absent proper auditing, which is often considered
a pervasive issue in low-income countries (Linden and Shastry 2012). Relatedly, if multiple tasks contribute
to the organization’s objective, and if only selected tasks are part of the performance targets (such as those
for which it is easier to obtain verifiable information), performance-based incentives may encourage
substitution away from the non-incentivized activities, reorienting the employees’ attention toward the
incentivized activities at the expense of other activities that may have been essential to the organization’s
objective (Basinga et al. 2011, Holmstrom and Milgrom 1991).
The bundling of performance-based funding and A&F
As the above considerations illustrate, designing effective governance practices for non-profits in low-
income countries is challenging due to their unique nature and the obstacles that they face. In what follows,
we argue that the bundling of i) performance-based funding and ii) A&F is a potential way to overcome
these challenges, as they complement each other in addressing the key obstacles faced by non-profits in
low-income countries. These complementarities arise in three ways.
First, a key challenge of performance-based incentives is that they may overwhelm and demotivate
employees who lack the necessary knowledge to improve the non-profit’s operations, a challenge that is
especially severe given the lack of organizational know-how and adequate training in low-income countries.
The provision of feedback offers a direct remedy to this challenge—that is, the bundling of feedback with
performance-based funding can help address the knowledge gap that would otherwise undermine the
effectiveness of performance-based funding. The importance of feedback in our context is in line with the
growing literature that highlights how feedback can contribute to the success of business ventures in low-
income countries (e.g., Anderson and McKenzie 2022, De Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff 2014, Dimitriadis
10 In the for-profit context, pay-for-social performance incentive schemes have been shown to be ineffective when
they are vague and insufficiently specified (Flammer, Hong, and Minor 2019).
8

and Koning 2022, Giorcelli 2019, McKenzie 2021, McKenzie and Woodruff 2014). Moreover, previous
work shows that feedback can be reassuring for individuals and help them build up their self-confidence
(Bandiera, Larcinese, and Rasul 2015). This in turn can further reinforce the employees’ motivation to
tackle the performance targets that are part of the performance-based incentives.
Second, while the above describes how feedback can enhance the effectiveness of performance-
based funding, the complementarities between the two likely operate in the other direction as well—that is,
performance-based funding can enhance the feedback’s effectiveness. Indeed, the previous literature
highlights the importance of incentives in promoting learning (e.g., Blimpo 2014, Kremer, Miguel, and
Thornton 2009). In this spirit, the combination of feedback with performance-based funding—that is,
feedback combined with incentives to act on this feedback and improve health outcomes—is likely to
induce the non-profit’s staff to pay closer attention to the feedback and build on this feedback to improve
the organization’s operations.
Third, the complementarities between feedback and performance-based funding are likely to be
further enhanced if the feedback is guided by more reliable information—a prerequisite for effective
feedback. The reliability of the information that guides the feedback can be improved by further bundling
feedback with auditing. The latter is likely to be crucial, as the obtention of relevant and verifiable
information is often considered a pervasive concern in low-income countries (e.g., Kerber et al. 2015,
Kumar et al. 2022).
In sum, we expect the bundling of performance-based funding and A&F to be an effective tool for
non-profit organizations in low-income countries, as the complementarities between the bundle’s
components reinforce each other in addressing the obstacles faced by non-profits in low-income countries.
In this regard, by highlighting the benefits of bundling different governance practices, we echo the insight
of Milgrom and Roberts (1988, 1990, 1995) that business practices can be substantially enhanced when
complementarities exist between these practices.
In the remainder of this paper, we turn to the empirical analysis to examine the effectiveness of this
bundle in the context of a randomized governance program implemented in the DRC.
9

3. Experimental design
In this section, we describe the PDSS program and the experimental design. This section draws from the
PDSS manual (PDSS 2016) that contains detailed information about the program.
3.1 The PDSS program
The PDSS program, known formally as “Projet de Développement du Système de Santé” (officially
translated by the World Bank as “Health System Strengthening for Better Maternal and Child Health
Results Project”) is a five-year nationwide public health program that was launched by the government of
the DRC with the aim to improve the utilization and quality of maternal and infant healthcare services in
targeted health zones in the country’s territory. The program began in 2017 in 156 health districts in 11 of
the country’s 26 provinces: Kwango, Kwilu, Mai-Ndombe, Équateur, Mongala, Sud-Ubangi, Tshuapa,
Haut-Katanga, Haut-Lomami, Lualaba, and Maniema. The program cost of $521 million is financed by the
DRC government, the World Bank, UNICEF (United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund),
UNDP (United Nations Development Program), Gavi, and donor country support.
The PDSS program attempts to improve the quantity and quality of primary healthcare services at
the health facility level through two main mechanisms. First, the program presents health facilities with
financial incentives to provide a “paquet minimum d’activités” (“minimum package of activities”). Defined
by the WHO, these packages put a strong emphasis on maternal and child health. Second, the program
presents health facilities with a summary of their performance on a quarterly basis. This information is
collected by the contracting and verification agencies (“établissements d’utilité publique,” EUPs)
established at the provincial level. These are semi-autonomous entities appointed by the DRC’s Ministry
of Health and Ministry of Finance to manage the contracting and procurement of health services with the
health facilities. Concretely, they monitor and verify the health performance outcomes of each facility and
provide feedback on the facility’s quarterly management plans.
Prior to the PDSS program, other performance-based financing schemes were piloted in the DRC.
These schemes presented a select number of health facilities with different rewards, initially taking the form
10

of generic drugs only (2007-2009), thereafter generic drugs and cash (2009-2010), and finally cash only
(2011-2017). Further, they were implemented initially in South Kivu only, later in North Kivu, Orientale,
Kasai-Occidental and Kasai-Oriental, and lastly in Katanga. Notice that these initial pilots with
performance-based financing were undertaken in only a limited number of health zones, which were
different from the zones targeted by the PDSS program. Aside from these pilot schemes, we are not aware
of major reforms in healthcare that coincided with our period of study, nor of other programs that may have
differentially affected our treated health centers and thus biased our estimates.
Assessments of these pilot schemes were at best mixed. Mayaka et al. (2011) evaluated the first
two pilot schemes using a qualitative research approach. They highlight the complexity of the schemes, a
lack of shared understanding by key stakeholders, a lack of community engagement, and public sector
mismanagement, especially corruption, as the main reasons for why the pilots led to unsatisfactory
outcomes. Huillery and Seban (2021) examined the impact of the fee (cash only)-for-performance system
on health service utilization and health providers’ motivation in 152 health facilities in Haut Katanga. They
find that, relative to the fixed payment system, the fee-for-performance mechanism slightly reduced service
utilization, and argue that the main explanation for this result is health workers’ lowered motivation at work
due to a lack of understanding of how to best perform.
Guided by these lessons learned, the design of the PDSS program departed from previous
performance-based financing schemes in healthcare in the DRC in three important ways. First, to address
the lack of awareness and understanding about evidence-based practices, the PDSS program provides not
only financial incentives but also auditing and feedback (A&F) to health facilities. Second, to mitigate
problems of mismanagement, the control over the contracting and procurement relationships with each
health facility was delegated by the government to third-party agencies at the provincial level. Furthermore,
the PDSS program also introduced a community verification system, whereby local associations are
mandated to check the actual existence of patients indicated in the facilities’ registries and collect
information about patients’ satisfaction. Taken together, these three distinct design features aimed to
improve the accountability of government and health workers, and the alignment of interests between the
11

health system’s key stakeholders: health workers, funders of the PDSS program, national and provincial
governments, and patient communities.
The background context in which the PDSS program was conceived is one marked not just by poor
health outcomes but also serious health system challenges. The DRC’s human development indicators are
among the lowest in the world, and four decades of conflict and mismanagement severely weakened the
country’s institutions and infrastructure. Moreover, the DRC is not on track to achieve any of the
Millennium Development Goals, including those related to maternal and child health. The main maternal
and child health indicators remain very poor. According to UNICEF (2016), the maternal mortality ratio is
693 (per 100,000 live births) and the under-five child mortality rate is 98 (per 1,000 live births).11
Decreasing these mortality rates requires improvements in both the quantity and quality of reproductive
and child health services. Together, these challenges help explain the aims and scope of the PDSS program.
3.2 Performance incentives
The PDSS program presents health facilities with financial incentives based on performance indicators
measured at the health facility level (as opposed to the level of individual health workers). The size of the
financial transfers (T) that health facilities receive depends on the performance along 22 health indicators
and overall service quality. The transfers paid to the health facilities are mainly used for purchasing essential
equipment. No more than fifty percent can be used toward health workers’ salaries. Payments are made
directly to the health facilities.12
The overall transfer is comprised of two parts:
(cid:2870)(cid:2870)
𝑇 (cid:3404) (cid:3533)𝑝 𝑞 (cid:3397)𝛼
(cid:3036)(cid:3046) (cid:3036)
(cid:3036)(cid:2880)(cid:2869)
11 As Figure A1 of the Online Appendix shows, the DRC is among the countries with the highest infant mortality rates
in the world. In 2017, about 7% of infants died within the first year of their life compared to 0.6% in the U.S. (United
Nations 2018).
12 Note that, even if some of the transfers are used toward the health center’s wages, this component remains distinct
from traditional financial incentives. This is because the subsidies are based on the health centers’ overall performance
and are paid directly to the health centers (as opposed to being paid to individual employees based on their individual
performance).
12

where the first part of the transfer reflects the performance along the 22 healthcare performance indicators
listed in Table A1 of the Online Appendix. For each indicator i, and the corresponding number of health
services q, a target is set depending on the size of the population served by the health facility. The payment
i
amount per unit of health service provided, p , varies depending on the percentage share s of the target
is
performance achieved. For each indicator i, the closer the actual performance is to the targeted performance,
the higher the unit price. Some of these indicators refer to the reasons for a visit (such as prenatal care or
delivery), whereas others refer to the type of services provided during a visit (such as tetanus vaccination
during prenatal care). All the indicators and payment amounts are defined in concordance with WHO
guidelines.
The second part of the transfer reflects the overall health service quality. The parameter α denotes
the “quality bonus,” a supplement of up to 25% of ∑(cid:2870)(cid:2870) 𝑝 𝑞 . Quality is assessed using a quality assessment
(cid:3036)(cid:2880)(cid:2869) (cid:3036)(cid:3046) (cid:3036)
grid that consists of a longlist of evidence-based practices. The grid considers practices in 15 distinct
domains, ranging from the overall organization and management of the health facility to practices in terms
of HIV/tuberculosis, and hygiene and sterilization. The list is provided in Tables A2 and A3. A total of 400
points can be earned. To receive a bonus, the health center must secure a minimum of 200 points, that is,
obtain a quality score of at least 50 percent. When the quality score is above 50 but below 80 percent, the
quality bonus is given by α = quality score × 25% × ∑(cid:2870)(cid:2870) 𝑝 𝑞 . When the quality score is above 80 percent,
(cid:3036)(cid:2880)(cid:2869) (cid:3036)(cid:3046) (cid:3036)
then the quality bonus is given by α = 25% × ∑(cid:2870)(cid:2870) 𝑝 𝑞 .
(cid:3036)(cid:2880)(cid:2869) (cid:3036)(cid:3046) (cid:3036)
Health facilities submit monthly activity reports and quarterly requests for payment to the EUPs,
who are responsible for the verification of data and authorization of payments. A team of auditors verifies
the reported number of medical acts in the minimum package of activities delivered by the center during
the period, and reviews the quality of the services provided using the quality assessment grid. The auditors
are recruited by and are accountable to the EUPs. They are helped by local associations whose role is to
question the community to i) find out whether the patients declared by the centers have effectively received
the corresponding treatments, and ii) gather feedback regarding their satisfaction. The team of auditors not
13

only assesses the health facilities’ performance outcomes and practices, it also provides feedback and
recommendations. The grid provides objective data regarding discrepancies between current practices and
target performance. Every quarter, the health facilities are expected to draw on these inputs to plan realistic
and progressive improvements. The auditors support the write-up of the quarterly management plans that
define how the improvements can be achieved. They also provide training in finances and stock
management.13
3.3 Selection into the program and randomization
The PDSS program was implemented in 11 of the DRC’s 26 provinces. The 11 provinces were selected
based on three criteria: poor health indicators, limited access to health services, and the ability to build on
or expand an ongoing partnership with an international organization. Only health centers registered with
the DRC Ministry of Health were eligible for the program. (They need not be affiliated with the government,
though.) Within each province, the selection of health facilities was made by Médecins d’Afrique, an
international NGO, in close collaboration with the World Bank’s impact assessment team and the PDSS
project unit. Together, they conducted a baseline evaluation for which they designed questionnaires and
protocols for establishing the selection. They then assessed the health centers’ suitability for the program
as health centers were required to have a minimum level of quantity and quality of services. The baseline
evaluation was conducted between June 2015 and March 2016. The selected health centers were then
randomly assigned into a treatment group (“Groupe cas”) and control group (“Groupe témoin”). The
randomization itself was done in Excel, and every third health center was assigned into the control group.
It is important to note that both the treated and control health centers are part of the PDSS program,
in that they both receive funding from the program. The payments are twofold. First, at the beginning of
the program (first quarter of 2017), health centers in both the treatment and control groups receive an initial
13 The auditors are members of the World Bank’s Development Policy Staff who were previously deployed in the
DRC and have expertise in healthcare. On top of their medical training, they received additional training by World
Bank specialists in performance-based financing. Note that it is usually the same team of auditors who visit a given
health center each quarter. This is meant to ensure a certain continuity in the feedback that is provided. A given team
of auditors is often affected to several health zones within a given province.
14

subsidy (called “unité d’investissement”) that is meant to finance the purchase of essential equipment.
Second, in the first month of each quarter (starting in the second quarter of 2017), the performance-based
subsidy is paid out to the treated health centers based on the auditors’ assessment conducted in the previous
quarter (the formula used to compute the subsidy is described above in Section 3.2). Control health centers
also receive a quarterly subsidy that matches the average subsidy received by the treated health centers in
the same quarter and the same health district. As such, the quarterly payments are on average the same in
both the treatment and control groups.
By design, the PDSS program provides an ideal setup for our study. By comparing health centers
that are randomly assigned to the treatment versus control group, we are able to identify the impact of the
governance intervention—that is the provision of performance-based incentives combined with A&F—on
the health centers’ operating efficiency and quality of healthcare services, holding everything else,
including funding, constant. Table 1 provides a summary of the PDSS intervention and what it entails for
both the treated and control health centers.
----- Insert Table 1 about here ----
4. Data and methodology
4.1 Data sources
The data on the DRC health centers are obtained from administrative records of the DRC Ministry of Health
that are maintained in the DRC’s Système National d’Information Sanitaire (SNIS). They include detailed
information on the health centers’ operations (e.g., staff, number of consultations, number of births), along
with the name and location of each health center.
These data were supplemented with identifiers for the treated and control health centers provided
by the World Bank. Our baseline sample includes a total of 999 health centers, out of which 674 were
assigned to the treatment group, and 325 to the control group. For each health center, we were granted
access to 14 quarters of data, ranging from the first quarter of 2016 until the second quarter of 2019. That
is, our dataset includes four quarters before and ten quarters after the program’s launch.
15

Note that, while the large-scale implementation of the PDSS program took place in the first quarter
of 2017, a small number of health centers were already treated in 2016 in a pilot-like setting. Those are
excluded from our sample.
4.2 Outcome variables
Our objective is to study how the governance intervention—that is, the provision of performance-based
incentives combined with A&F—affects health centers’ outcomes. In what follows, we describe the
outcome variables.
Health center’s operating efficiency
We compute a health center’s operating efficiency as the number of primary healthcare services performed
divided by the number of employees. This measure captures the health center’s labor productivity (i.e.,
output per employee). Note that the health centers in our sample only offer primary healthcare services.
Secondary healthcare services are typically administered at hospitals, often upon referrals from the health
centers.
Health center’s employees
We use several variables to examine changes in the health center’s staff. First, we use the total number of
employees working at the health center. Second, we decompose this total into the number of doctors, nurses,
and administrative personnel, respectively.
Volume of healthcare services
To measure the volume (i.e., the quantity) of healthcare services, we use the number of primary healthcare
services performed. Since antenatal care and childbirth are the main services performed at the health
centers, we also use two additional metrics: the number of maternity and childhood healthcare services
performed, and the number of births.
16

Quality of healthcare services
To measure the quality of healthcare services, we focus on infant mortality at birth. This is a key metric in
our context since antenatal care and childbirth are the main services performed at the health centers. Infant
mortality at birth can occur in two forms: stillbirth and neonatal death. Stillbirth refers to a baby born with
no sign of life at or after 28 weeks of gestation; neonatal death refers to a baby who dies within the first 28
days of life. We compute the ratio of stillborn babies to the total number of births (henceforth “share of
stillbirths”), the ratio of neonatal deaths to the total number of births (“share of neonatal deaths”), and the
complement (“share of live births”). These three ratios allow us to assess not only the quality of the
childbirth services per se, but also the quality of antenatal care services. Indeed, medical research has shown
that antenatal care reduces the likelihood of stillbirth and neonatal death (Adam et al. 2005, Hollowell et
al. 2011). As such, the above measures capture the quality of the main services performed at the health
centers.
4.3 Summary statistics
Table 2 provides summary statistics for the 999 health centers in our sample. All statistics refer to the fourth
quarter of 2016 (i.e., the quarter that precedes the start of the PDSS program). On average, health centers
in our sample performed 1,611 primary healthcare services (236 on a per employee basis). The majority
(957 out of 1,611) were maternity and childhood healthcare services.14 As discussed above, antenatal care
and childbirth are the main services performed at the health centers; the summary statistics reflect this
institutional feature of the DRC’s healthcare system.
----- Insert Table 2 about here ----
Other statistics are worth highlighting. The average number of employees is 7.1, consisting mainly
of nurses and administrative personnel. The average (quarterly) number of births is 53.8, out of which
0.70% are stillbirths, and 0.17% neonatal deaths. Lastly, as can be seen from the bottom panel, the average
14 Note that the number of healthcare services is not equal to the number of patients, as the same patient can receive
multiple services within the same consultation.
17

health center is located in a health district of 204,409 inhabitants, and a health area of 11,135 inhabitants.15
To further characterize the health centers from our sample, Figure 1 provides photographs featuring two of
them.
----- Insert Figure 1 about here ----
4.4 Randomization tests
Our identification strategy relies on the random assignment of health centers to the treatment and control
groups. Since randomization is a feature of the PDSS program, this requirement should hold by design. To
empirically assess the validity of the randomization, we can examine the covariate balance prior to the
treatment—intuitively, if the assignment is truly random, there should be no systematic difference between
health centers in the treatment and control groups based on pre-treatment characteristics.
We conduct this analysis in Table 3, where we report the same set of summary statistics as in Table
2, but separately for the 674 health centers in the treatment group and the 325 health centers in the control
group. The statistics are again computed in the fourth quarter of 2016 (i.e., the quarter that precedes the
launch of the PDSS program). As can be seen, there is no systematic difference between the treated and
control health centers. For all covariates, the summary statistics are very similar in economic terms. They
are similar in statistical terms as well. Specifically, the difference-in-means test (reported in the last column)
is always insignificant, with p-values ranging from 0.130 to 0.981.16
----- Insert Table 3 about here ----
In Figure 2, we further plot the location of the health centers in the control group (blue markers)
and treatment group (green markers) on the DRC map. We caution that the map is incomplete as granular
geo-codes (and hence the longitude-latitude coordinates) are only available for about 73% of the sample.
15 The DRC is partitioned into 516 health districts (also called health “zones”) and 8,504 health areas. Appendix A
provides a description of the DRC’s health system along with a characterization of the health districts and health areas,
respectively.
16 This randomization is further illustrated in Figure A2, where we plot the distribution of each outcome variable in
the treatment vs. control groups in the quarter preceding the treatment. As can be seen, the distributions are very
similar for each variable. This is further confirmed by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test of identical distributions.
For the variables plotted in Figure A2, the null of identical distributions cannot be rejected with p-values ranging from
0.140 to 0.980.
18

As can be seen, there is no apparent imbalance between the two groups. More formally, when we examine
the distribution of the control and treated health centers within each province, we find no significant
deviation from the program’s targeted 2/3 of treated health centers. Specifically, the null of a 2/3 distribution
within each province cannot be rejected with a p-value of 0.268.
----- Insert Figure 2 about here ----
4.5 Methodology
To examine how the treatment affects health center outcomes, we use a difference-in-differences
methodology. Specifically, we estimate the following regression:
y = α + α + β × treatment × post + γ × treatment × post + ε (1)
it i t i t = 0 to 4 i t = 5 to 9 it
where y is the outcome variable for health center i in quarter t. The outcome variables are either ratios (e.g.,
share of stillbirths) or levels (e.g., number of employees). We take the natural logarithm of all level
variables. The quarters range from t = –4 (Q1 2016) to t = 9 (Q2 2019), that is, the sample includes four
quarters before and ten quarters after the intervention (t = 0 is the quarter of the intervention, Q1 2017). On
the right-hand side of the equation, α are health center fixed effects; α are quarter fixed effects; treatment
i t i
is an indicator variable equal to one if the health center is in the treatment group (and zero if it is in the
control group); post and post are indicator variables equal to one for the first five quarters (t =
t = 0 to 4 t = 5 to 9
0 to 4) and the subsequent five quarters (t = 5 to 9), respectively, following the intervention; and ε is the
it
error term. We block-bootstrap standard errors (using 1,000 bootstrap replications) at the health center level
to account for potential dependence of the error term along the dimension of the treatment. The coefficients
of interest are those of treatment × post and treatment × post that capture the treatment effect
i t = 0 to 4 i t = 5 to 9
in the first five and subsequent five quarters of the intervention, respectively.
In our main analyses, we also estimate a variant of equation (1) that provides a finer-grained
characterization of the dynamics of the treatment effect:
y = α + α + ∑ β × treatment × α + ε (2)
it i t t ≠ –1 t i t it
where β , β , β allow us to assess potential pre-trends and β , β , …, and β provide a
t = –4 t = –3 t = –2 t = 0 t = 1 t = 9
19

characterization of the treatment dynamics on a quarterly basis (relative to t = –1).
5. Results
5.1 Impact of the governance treatment on health center outcomes
Baseline estimates
Table 4 presents our main results. The estimates are obtained from regression (1) using the 999 health
centers in our sample over the 14 quarters for which we have data (that is, the number of observations is
999 × 14 = 13,986).
----- Insert Table 4 about here ----
As can be seen, the benefits from the governance treatment are not immediate. In all columns, the
treatment effect is small and insignificant in the first five quarters (t = 0 to 4). It is only in the subsequent
five quarters (t = 5 to 9) that we observe significant changes in health center outcomes.
In column (1), the dependent variable is operating efficiency. As is shown, the governance
treatment brings about large improvements in quarters t = 5 to 9. The point estimate of 0.255 (p-value =
0.000) implies that the number of primary healthcare services per employee increases by 25.5%.
In columns (2)-(8), we unpack this improvement in operating efficiency by examining the
numerator (number of primary healthcare services performed) and denominator (number of employees).
We find that the treated health centers are able to expand their volume of healthcare services without a
commensurate increase in employment. Specifically, we find in column (6) that the number of primary
healthcare services performed increases by 23.3% (p-value = 0.000). This increase in the volume of
healthcare services is further confirmed by the estimates in columns (7) and (8) showing that the number
of maternal and childhood healthcare services and the number of births, respectively, increase by 14.9%
(p-value = 0.052) and 13.8% (p-value = 0.004).
While the volume of healthcare services increases, the number of employees does not. This can be
seen from column (2), in which we observe no significant change in employment. In columns (3)-(5), where
we decompose employment by job types, we find no significant change in the number of doctors and nurses.
20

Interestingly, the treated health centers have less of a need to hire administrative employees—relative to
the control group, their number of administrative employees decreases by 5.8% (p-value = 0.043). Note
that the decrease in administrative employees is not about layoffs. In fact, both the treatment and control
group increase their administrative staff during the sample period. The observed difference between the
two groups indicates that the treated health centers hire fewer additional administrative employees
compared to the control group.
Overall, the findings from columns (1)-(8) indicate that the treated health centers become more
efficient following the governance intervention. They are able to offer a higher volume of services without
a commensurate increase in employment. In addition, they have less of a need to hire administrative
employees in order to expand their volume of services.
In columns (9)-(11), we turn to the quality of healthcare services. We find evidence for a significant
increase in service quality following the treatment. Specifically, we find that, in quarters t = 5 to 9, the share
of stillbirths decreases by 0.21 percentage points (p-value = 0.003), and the share of neonatal deaths by
0.11 percentage points (p-value = 0.044). Correspondingly, the share of life births increases by 0.32
percentage points (p-value = 0.001). Put differently, for every 1,000 new births, the governance treatment
helped save about 2.1 lives at birth (reduction in stillbirths) and 1.1 lives within the first 28 days after birth
(reduction in neonatal deaths). These are large effects in light of the baseline probabilities. Indeed, the pre-
treatment share of stillbirths and neonatal deaths is on average 0.91 percentage points (Table 3). Hence, a
decrease by 0.32 percentage points in the share of stillbirths and neonatal deaths corresponds to a 35.2%
reduction in infant mortality. Overall, these results indicate that the governance intervention brought about
large improvements in health outcomes.
In Table A4, we further report the minimum detectable effect sizes (MDES) pertaining to a 5%
significance level and 80% power. As is shown, our main estimates—that is, the increase in operating
efficiency and the increase in the share of live births in quarters t = 5 to 9—are well above their respective
21

MDES.17
Dynamics
In Table 5, we provide a finer-grained characterization of the treatment dynamics. To do so, we estimate
regression (2), in which we estimate the treatment effect on a quarterly basis (relative to t = –1). This finer-
grained analysis also allows us to assess potential pre-trends.
As can be seen, we find no evidence for pre-trends; the corresponding point estimates are all small
and insignificant. Moreover—and consistent with our findings from Table 4—we find no evidence for an
immediate response at the time of the intervention. Rather, the benefits of the treatment take a few quarters
to materialize. The first tangible effect is observed after four quarters, when the increase in operating
efficiency becomes significant (along with the increase in the number of primary healthcare services and
the lower need for administrative employees). The improvements in the quality of healthcare services take
even longer to materialize. It is only after seven quarters that the birth mortality statistics start showing
significant improvements. In Figure 3, we plot the coefficients in event time (along with the corresponding
95% confidence bounds) for each outcome variable.18
----- Insert Table 5 and Figure 3 about here ----
The delayed response observed in Table 5 and Figure 3 is consistent with the gradual adoption and
learning of better practices. This was confirmed in a series of interviews we conducted with program
participants (N = 20).19 Collectively, the respondents highlighted that a key challenge was the lack of
adequate training and organizational know-how. In this regard, the quarterly rounds of feedback (combined
with incentives to actually act on this feedback) were seen as essential in inducing tangible changes that
17 In Appendix B, we present several robustness checks. Specifically, we show that our results are robust if we i) use
clustered standard errors (Table A5), ii) use Anderson’s (2008) sharpened q-values that account for multiple
hypothesis testing (Table A6), and iii) re-estimate the regressions of the share of stillbirths, neonatal deaths, and live
births using weighted least squares (WLS), weighting observations by the number of births, thereby accounting for
the fact that ratios of births are more accurately measured when the number of births is higher (Table A7).
18 In Figure A3, we plot the evolution of each outcome variable separately in the treatment and control groups.
19 We conducted 20 interviews with individuals involved in the PDSS program, out of which 17 were based in the
DRC. The interviewees included health center employees (nurses and doctors), auditors, and programs administrators.
The recordings of these interviews are available upon request.
22

would ultimately translate into higher efficiency and quality of services.
It is also worth noting that the long learning curve of the health centers’ employees was a key
consideration in designing the PDSS program. As discussed in Section 3.1, prior to the PDSS program,
pilot programs using performance-based financing designs were run in selected parts of the DRC. These
programs were unsuccessful, suggesting that the mere use of performance-based financing is insufficient
to induce tangible improvements. This led to the innovative design of the PDSS that combines
performance-based incentives with A&F.
Lastly, the longer lag we observe for the improvements in infant mortality (7 quarters, compared
to 4 quarters for the improvements in operating efficiency) reflects the type of services provided at the
health centers. Indeed, the bulk of the health centers’ services pertain to pre-natal care. By their very nature,
improvements in pre-natal care reduce the risk of stillbirths and neonatal deaths several months in the
future, and are likely more effective when higher-quality services are provided throughout the full
pregnancy cycle. In other words, the longer lag we observe is likely explained by the fact that it first takes
about 4 quarters for the governance improvements to materialize, and then another 9 months (i.e., another
3 quarters, adding up to 7 quarters) for patients to fully benefit from the improved pre‐natal care throughout
their pregnancy and until carrying the child to term.
Economic magnitudes
As mentioned above, our baseline estimates are large in economic terms—the estimates from Table 4 imply
that operating efficiency increases by 25.5% and infant mortality decreases by 35.2%. Our interviews of
program participants help shed light on these magnitudes. All respondents (N = 20) expected the
improvements to be large, citing the low education level and inadequate training of the health center
employees as key rationales for a steep learning curve. One respondent even qualified the benefits of the
program as “énormes” (enormous) due to the above reasons.
While interviews are subjective in nature, a perhaps more objective benchmark is provided by the
World Bank, who targeted to reach a 65% quality score for the treated health centers, compared to a 20%
23

score prior to the start of the PDSS program (World Bank 2018). This corresponds to more than a three-
fold increase in quality.
To further assess the magnitudes, and put them into perspective, we benchmark our estimates
against related estimates from the literature. In this regard, the literature on management practices is
especially informative, as considerable effort has been put into quantifying the productivity gains from
different management practices. (In spirit, our governance treatment consisting of performance-based
incentives combined with A&F can be seen as a form of “structured management practice” in the
terminology of Bloom et al. 2019). Specifically, in their study of management practices at U.S.
manufacturing plants, Bloom et al. (2019) find that a one standard deviation increase in their score of
structured management is associated with a 26% percent increase in labor productivity, noting that “[t]he
magnitude of the productivity-management relationship is large” (p. 1649). Giorcelli (2019) finds that
Italian companies who participated in a management assistance program achieved a 49% increase in
productivity. Similarly, Bruhn et al. (2017) find that Mexican small and medium enterprises that were
offered a one-year access to management consulting services achieved a 27% increase in productivity.
Naturally, we caution that the benefits of the improved management practices considered in these
articles need not be directly comparable to those of the intervention considered in our study given the
specificity of our setting. Nevertheless, they do provide guidance in terms of how changes in business
practices can affect operating efficiency. Collectively, they indicate that the efficiency gains can be
substantial, in the ballpark of what we find in our setting. In addition, such efficiency gains might be larger
in low-income countries such as the DRC due to the potentially bigger room for improvement, as several
respondents pointed out in our interviews.20
20 Another way to put the magnitudes into perspective is through the VSL (value of a statistical life) framework.
Viscusi and Masterman (2017) estimate a VSL of $71,000 for the DRC (compared to a VSL of $9.6M for the U.S.).
Our baseline results in Table 4 suggest that the governance treatment reduces infant mortality by 0.32 percentage
points. Factoring in the number of treated health centers (674) and the average number of births per health center
(55.7, see Table 3), the governance intervention corresponds to VSL gains in the amount of $8.5M. Compared to the
cost of the program ($521M), this translates into a VSL-ROI of about 1.6% from governance alone. Naturally, we
caution that this number likely represents a lower bound since the improvements brought about by the governance
intervention are likely to improve patient health in ways that are not captured by our infant mortality metrics.
24

Opening up the black box of the treated health centers: what explains the improvements in operating
efficiency and health outcomes?
Our results indicate that the PDSS program led to significant improvements in operating efficiency and
health outcomes at the treated health centers. However, a limitation of our analysis is that we do not directly
observe which operational changes are made at the treated health centers.
To gain insights into what happened within the “black box” of the treated health centers, we
obtained additional data from the DRC’s Ministry of Health. Specifically, we were given access to the 15
quality scores that were collected at the treated health centers as part of the PDSS program. In Table A8
and Figure A4, we examine the change in these quality scores over the 10 quarters for which we have data
(that is, from t = 0 until t = 9). Naturally, we caution that this analysis is merely descriptive, as these data
were only collected at the treated health centers (i.e., no data are available for the control group) during the
PDSS program (i.e., we do not have pre-treatment data).21
As can be seen from Table A8, we observe large increases in the quality of planning, financial
management, and general organization. Over the 10 quarters, the corresponding quality indices (which
range from 0 to 100) increased by 72.6 (p-value = 0.000), 55.0 (p-value = 0.000), and 50.7 (p-value = 0.000)
index points, respectively. This suggests that improvements in planning, financial management, and the
health centers’ general organization are plausible explanations for the observed improvements in operating
efficiency.
The other quality scores in Table A8 pertain to the clinics’ medical operations. While they all
increase following the intervention, the largest improvements are found in categories that are of direct
relevance to maternal and childhood health. Those include maternity care, pre-natal care, and family
planning (those categories show quality improvements of 41.2, 39.4, and 38.3 index points, respectively,
all with p-value = 0.000). These improvements are plausible channels that explain the decrease in the
21 A description of these quality scores is provided in Table A3. Note that these data are available for 646 of the 674
treated health centers. Also, since the category “tracer drugs” has missing data for t = 0, 1, and 2, it is not included in
this analysis.
25

number of stillbirths and neonatal deaths documented above.22
The dynamic analysis in Figure A4 further shows that these improvements tend to materialize
within the initial quarters of the PDSS program and remain somewhat stable thereafter. This is consistent
with the “learning” interpretation discussed earlier, in which the initial quarters of the program are
essentially a learning phase that subsequently translates into higher operating efficiency and lower infant
mortality.
Cross-sectional heterogeneity
In Appendix C (and Tables A9 and A10), we examine how our baseline estimates vary depending on several
cross-sectional characteristics. We find that the increase in operating efficiency and the decrease in infant
mortality are significantly stronger in districts with a lower density of health centers (measured by the
number of health centers divided by the health district’s population). These findings are consistent with the
learning interpretation, as they suggest that health centers benefit more from the treatment when it is harder
to learn and adopt best practices from their peers.
In addition, we find that i) the increase in operating efficiency is higher for health centers with
lower ex ante operating efficiency, and ii) the decrease in infant mortality is more pronounced for health
centers with higher ex ante mortality. These findings indicate that the improvements brought about by the
treatment are larger when there is more to improve and learn to begin with. This again points toward the
learning interpretation discussed above.
5.2 Potential challenges and alternative interpretations
Contamination
An important concern is that the treatment might be contaminated by strategic interactions among nearby
health facilities. In particular, health centers may try to “game” the performance-based incentives by
22 Large increases are also found in two other categories, namely indigent committee and drugs and consumables. The
former refers to the attention given to the most vulnerable groups in an effort to foster more inclusive healthcare.
Arguably, both dimensions are likely to further contribute to lower infant mortality.
26

strategically refusing high-risk patients (e.g., pregnant mothers who face a higher risk of stillbirth), referring
them to nearby health centers and hospitals. Such gaming behavior could potentially explain our results.
Nevertheless, this concern is mitigated, for two reasons. First, as part of their assessment protocol,
the auditors conduct interviews among the local community. Accordingly, if health centers were to transfer
high-risk patients elsewhere, they would likely find out. Second, in Table A11, we examine whether the
share of stillbirths and neonatal deaths increases (and the share of live births decreases, respectively) at
other healthcare facilities that are located in the same health district as the treated health centers. Those
include hospitals (columns (1)-(3)), control health centers (columns (4)-(6)), and health centers not in the
PDSS program (columns (7)-(9)) that are located in the same health district as the treated health centers.
As can be seen, we find that all point estimates are small and insignificant, which is inconsistent with the
gaming interpretation.23
Other challenges
In Appendix D, we discuss other potential challenges of the PDSS experiment. Specifically, we discuss the
possibility that i) corruption, ii) employee turnover, iii) implementation challenges (e.g., limited
accessibility to certain health centers), iv) the Hawthorne effect, and v) the potential rise of “superstar”
health centers might affect our results. As we discuss in Appendix D, these challenges are unlikely to
materially affect our results.
6. Funding vs. governance: auxiliary evidence from health centers outside the PDSS program
In the analysis presented so far, we focused on health centers that were selected for the PDSS program—
that is, health centers that were either in the control group (receiving PDSS funding) or in the treatment
23 A related concern is that the treated health centers may expand their capacity post-treatment, and hence be able to
see a higher number of low-risk patients who would have otherwise relied on home care. In this scenario, the treated
health centers would have a higher share of low-risk patients, which could explain the improvements in the birth
statistics. Nevertheless, in our interviews, it was noted that the choice to deliver at home or at the health center is not
made based on the risk assessment of the pregnancy, as women themselves cannot easily assess the level of risk of
their pregnancy. Rather, the stated rationales were the perceived quality of services offered by the health centers and
the value for money of these services. Neither is related to the pregnancy’s riskiness.
27

group (receiving PDSS funding and the governance treatment).
In this section, we consider a third group of health centers, namely those that are not part of the
PDSS program. We refer to this group as the “outside group.” By construction, the outside group does not
receive any funding nor the governance intervention from the PDSS program. Accordingly, we can use the
outside group to examine the relationship between funding and governance. Specifically, by comparing the
treatment group (that receives funding and the governance treatment) versus the outside group (that receives
neither), we can assess the benefits of the ‘funding and governance’ bundle. Similarly, by comparing the
control group (that receives funding) versus the outside group, we can assess the effectiveness of ‘funding
only.’
Our dataset from the DRC Ministry of Health covers a total of 5,832 health centers in the outside
group. Table A12 provides summary statistics for those. Compared to the 999 health centers in our sample,
the “outside” health centers are on average smaller (5.2 versus 7.1 employees) and provide a lower volume
of services (1,153 versus 1,611 primary healthcare services performed). These differences are not
surprising. Indeed, as described in Section 3.3, inclusion in the PDSS program is not random. (What is
random is the assignment to the treatment versus control group within the PDSS program.) Hence, a caveat
of using the outside group is that we can no longer rely on randomization, and hence any such analysis is
correlational per se.
To mitigate this caveat, we use a nearest-neighbor matching in which health centers in the treatment
group (and control group, respectively) are matched to health centers in the outside group based on a large
set of observables. Specifically, for each of the 674 health centers in the treatment group (and for each of
the 325 health centers in the control group, respectively), we match the nearest—i.e., most similar—health
center out of the pool of 5,832 health centers in the outside group. The matching is done in two steps. First,
we require that the matched health center be located in the same health district as the treated health center.
(If less than 10 outside health centers are available within the relevant district, we relax this requirement
and require that the matched health center be located in the same province as the treated health center.)
Second, out of the remaining candidates, we select the nearest neighbor based on the health center
28

characteristics in Table A12 (measured in the quarter that precedes the PDSS program). The nearest
neighbor is then the one with the lowest Mahalanobis distance to the treated health center along the
matching characteristics.24
This matching procedure ensures that the matched health centers from the outside group are as
similar as possible to the treated health centers (and control health centers, respectively) ex ante. The
covariate balance, provided in Table A13, confirms that there is no significant difference between the
respective groups.
To compare outcomes in the i) treatment versus outside groups and ii) control versus outside
groups, we estimate a variant of regression (1) in which we pool the two matched samples together and
replace the treatment indicator with a treatment vs. outside indicator (which is equal to one for health centers
in the treatment group and zero otherwise) and a control vs. outside indicator (which is equal to one for
health centers in the control group and zero otherwise). To ensure that comparisons are made within each
matched group-pair (that is, treated and control health centers are compared to their respective matched
outside health centers), we include pair by quarter fixed effects in all regressions. The results are provided
in Table 6.
----- Insert Table 6 about here ----
Control group versus outside group: assessing the effectiveness of funding alone
The coefficients pertaining to the control vs. outside indicator provide a comparison of health centers in the
control group versus health centers in the outside group. Since the control group receives PDSS funding,
and the outside group does not, this comparison allows us to examine how funding as standalone (i.e.,
without governance improvements) affects health center outcomes.
As is shown, we find that funding as standalone leads to increases in the scale of the health center’s
operations—the number of employees increases by 18.0% (p-value = 0.000), the number of primary
24 Formally, the Mahalanobis distance δ between treated health center i and candidate health center j is given by δ =
[(X – X)’ Σ-1 (X – X)]½, where X is the vector of matching characteristics and Σ the covariance matrix.
i j i j
29

healthcare services by 38.6% (p-value = 0.046), the number of maternal and childhood healthcare services
by 47.0% (p-value = 0.032), and the number of births by 21.4% (p-value = 0.049)—but does not bring
about significant improvements in operating efficiency (column (1)) nor in the quality of healthcare services
(columns (9)-(11)). This indicates that funding by itself, while helpful in increasing the health center’s scale
and volume of services, is not sufficient to induce improvements in operating efficiency nor the quality of
service.
Treatment group versus outside group: assessing the effectiveness of funding and governance combined
Analogously, the coefficients pertaining to the treatment vs. outside indicator provide a comparison of
health centers in the treatment group versus health centers in the outside group. This comparison allows us
to examine how the combination of both funding and governance affects health center outcomes.
We find again that, compared to the outside group, the treated health centers substantially increase
the scale of their operations—the number of employees increases by 14.8% (p-value = 0.001), the number
of primary healthcare services by 60.1% (p-value = 0.000), the number of maternal and childhood
healthcare services by 56.8% (p-value = 0.001), and the number of births by 34.3% (p-value = 0.000). In
addition, and similar to what we observed in Table 4, operating efficiency (column (1)) and the quality of
healthcare services (columns (9)-(11)) significantly improve following the treatment. Overall, these results
indicate that the ‘funding and governance’ bundle benefits the treated health centers in two ways: the
additional funding allows them to grow their operations, while the governance intervention helps them
improve their operating efficiency and the quality of their healthcare services.
Taken together, the results from Tables 4 and 6 suggest that i) funding alone increases the scale of
the health centers but does not improve operating efficiency nor service quality (Table 6); ii) governance
alone improves operating efficiency and service quality (Table 4); and iii) the combination of funding and
governance leads to both an increase in the scale of the health centers and improvements in the health
centers’ operating efficiency and service quality (Table 6). As such, these results suggest that funding is
not a substitute for governance. Instead, they complement each other in improving the health centers’
30

overall contribution to health outcomes.
7. Discussion and conclusion
Every year, substantial amounts of taxpayer and donor money are channeled toward improving the
healthcare systems of low-income countries. However, an important challenge is to ensure that this funding
be used efficiently. This challenge is complicated by the fact that a large share of healthcare services is
provided by non-profit health centers that often lack effective governance structures, organizational know-
how, and adequate training.
In this paper, we argue that the bundling of performance-based funding with auditing and feedback
(A&F) is an effective way to overcome these challenges. The intuition is as follows. First, performance-
based funding alone may be ineffective if the health center’s managers and employees lack the necessary
knowledge to improve the health center’s operations. Combining performance-based funding with feedback
helps mitigate this challenge. In turn, the bundling of these two provisions—that is, feedback joint with
incentives to act on this feedback and achieve specific health outcomes—is likely to enhance the
effectiveness of the feedback. Second, the provision of effective feedback requires reliable information—
another important challenge in low-income countries—which can be addressed by combining feedback
with auditing.
To empirically examine the effectiveness of this bundle, we exploit a unique empirical setting
provided by the PDSS program in the DRC. This program was administered in about 1,000 non-profit
health centers that were randomly assigned into a treatment and control group. While health centers in both
groups received financial subsidies from the program, only those in the treatment group were subject to a
governance treatment consisting of performance-based funding combined with A&F. As such, this
randomized program provides an ideal setup to study how this bundle of governance practices affects health
centers’ outcomes, holding everything else (including financial subsidies) constant.
We find that the governance treatment led to i) a significant increase in the number of services
performed per employee, and ii) a significant reduction in the share of stillbirths and neonatal deaths. These
31

findings indicate that the bundle of performance-based funding and A&F plays an important role in
improving the health centers’ operating efficiency and the quality of their services.
In auxiliary analyses, we further examine whether financial subsidies could potentially serve as a
substitute for the governance treatment. We find that this is unlikely to be the case. Specifically, we find
that health centers that only receive financial subsidies increase their scale, but do not show improvements
in operating efficiency nor in the quality of their services. In contrast, health centers that receive both
financial subsidies and the governance treatment improve both their scale as well as their operating
efficiency and service quality. This suggests that financial subsidies and the governance treatment operate
as complements toward the objective of increasing the health centers’ overall contribution to health
outcomes.
Our findings have important implications for practice. Every year, large amounts of funding are
invested in non-profit organizations pursuing social and environmental causes and aiming to achieve the
seventeen SDGs of the United Nations (e.g., ending poverty, reducing hunger, promoting healthy lives and
well-being, reducing inequalities, addressing climate change, protecting life on land and below water). The
insights of this study help inform non-profit health centers, as well as their donors and impact investors,
about the governance mechanisms that are available and effective in achieving their objectives and
maximizing the impact of the funds invested.
Our study contributes to several strands of the literature. First, by exploring how a bundle of
governance mechanisms consisting of performance-based incentives combined with A&F affects the
effectiveness of non-profit health centers in low-income countries, our work contributes to the governance
literature and highlights the importance of designing governance practices that take into account the unique
nature of non-profits in low-income countries and the obstacles that they face. As such, our study
complements the large literature that has studied the role of governance and management practices in the
context of for-profit organizations (e.g., Aguilera et al. 2016, Anderson and McKenzie 2022, Blader,
Gartenberg, and Prat 2020, Bloom and Van Reenen 2007, Bloom et al. 2013, Bryan, Tilcsik, and Zhu 2017,
Cai and Szeidl 2018, Chatterji et al. 2019, De Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff 2014, Dimitriadis and Koning
32

2022, Iacovone, Maloney, and McKenzie 2022, McKenzie 2021, McKenzie and Woodruff 2014, 2017).
Since the non-profit and for-profit contexts are fundamentally different, it is a priori unclear which
governance and management practices are effective for non-profits in low-income countries. In particular,
while performance-based incentives have been shown to yield substantial efficiency gains in the for-profit
sector, the literature that studies the use of performance-based incentives in the non-profit sector of low-
income countries finds that such incentives tend to be ineffective, and sometimes even backfire (e.g.,
Basinga et al. 2011, Eichler and Levine 2009, Huillery and Seban 2021, Linden and Shastry 2012, Miller
and Babiarz 2013). A potential explanation is the lack of adequate training and know-how that may
undermine these incentives and give rise to unintended consequences (e.g., employees being demotivated).
As we argue, the bundling of performance-based incentives with other provisions—namely, regular rounds
of feedback (which help mitigate the knowledge gap) and auditing (which helps obtain reliable information
that informs the feedback)—is a potential way to overcome these obstacles, which we confirm in our
empirical analysis. As such, our study helps move this literature forward by providing new insights on how
to think about and design effective performance-based incentives for non-profits in low-income countries.
Second, our paper is related to the literature that emphasizes the importance of complementarities
in business practices. In particular, Milgrom and Roberts (1988, 1990, 1995) introduced the
“complementarity view” of technological change, arguing that the adoption of new technologies is likely
more successful when companies adopt strategic and organizational practices that are complementary to
the new technology.25 Although their context is fundamentally different, our paper builds on the notion of
complementarities in an analogous fashion—as we argue, the bundling of performance-based funding and
A&F is effective because they complement each other in addressing key challenges faced by non-profits in
low-income countries.
Third, our study relates to the large literature that studies the social performance of i) for-profit
organizations (e.g., Eccles, Ioannou, and Serafeim 2014, Flammer 2015, Flammer, Hong, and Minor 2019,
25 As an example, Milgrom and Roberts (1995) describe how the adoption of product line breadth is complementary
to technologies that increase manufacturing flexibility.
33

King and Lenox 2001); ii) for-profit organizations in collaboration with non-profits and non-governmental
organizations (e.g., Ballesteros and Gatignon 2019, Cabral et al. 2019, Chatain and Plaksenkova 2019,
Durand and Huysentruyt 2022, Rousseau, Berrone, and Gelabert 2019); iii) hybrid organizations (e.g.,
Battilana and Dorado 2010, Cobb, Wry, and Zhao 2016, Jay 2013, Pache and Santos 2013, Quélin,
Kivleniece, and Lazzarini 2017); iv) non-profit organizations in the healthcare sector (e.g., Kellogg 2009);
v) non-profit organizations in developing countries (e.g., Mair, Marti, and Ventresca 2012); as well as vi)
the literature on non-profit governance (e.g., Bertrand et al. 2020, Fisman and Hubbard 2005, Krause et al.
2019). Our study complements this vibrant line of work by exploring how a bundle of governance practices
can help non-profits improve health outcomes in low-income countries, and thereby contribute to the
attainment of the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). In this regard, our study also
adds to the growing literature that examines how management research can help understand and address
grand societal challenges (e.g., Berrone et al. 2016, George et al. 2016a, Vakili and McGahan 2016).
Fourth, our study examines an underexplored institutional context: Africa, and more specifically
the DRC in Sub-Saharan Africa. While most of the insights from the governance literature have been
obtained by studying organizations in high-income and emerging countries, much less is known about (for-
profit and non-profit) organizations in low-income countries, and especially Africa (Anderson and
McKenzie 2022, Dimitriadis and Koning 2022, George et al. 2016b).26 Yet, understanding how to improve
the governance of these organizations—and the implications for operating efficiency and their social
impact—is crucial in order to promote their development and the attainment of the United Nations’ SDGs.
Our study calls for future research. First, our findings are specific to the healthcare sector in a low-
income country (namely, the DRC). In this regard, a fruitful avenue for future research is to examine
whether our findings have external validity across sectors and countries, including higher-income countries.
26 For example, the literature on non-profit governance typically focuses on issues that are germane to large non-
profits in economically developed countries (e.g., Bertrand et al. 2020, Fisman and Hubbard 2005, Krause et al. 2019).
Similarly, the operations research literature in healthcare—which studies how to optimize hospitals’ operating
processes—has focused on large-scale hospitals in the U.S. and other high-income countries (Berry Jaeker and Tucker
2016, Roth, Tucker, and Venkataraman 2019, Song et al. 2018).
34

Arguably, the challenges faced by non-profit organizations in higher-income countries are similar but likely
less severe than in low-income countries. As such, the effectiveness of the governance bundle considered
in this study might differ. Future research may find it worthwhile to explore and characterize these
differences. Second, the governance treatment in the PDSS program is administered through a bundle of
governance mechanisms (i.e., performance-based funding combined with A&F), and hence we cannot
separate between them. Accordingly, another exciting avenue for future research would be to “un-bundle”
this governance bundle and quantify the relative importance of each individual provision. Lastly, and
relatedly, future research could explore the effectiveness of other types of governance and management
practices available to non-profit organizations in low-income countries and track their impact over time.
References
Adam T, Lim SS, Mehta S, Bhutta ZA, Fogstad H, Mathai M, Zupan J, Darmstadt GL (2005) Cost effectiveness
analysis of strategies for maternal and neonatal health in developing countries. British Medical J.
331(7525):1107.
Aguilera R, Florackis C, Kim H (2016) Advancing the corporate governance research agenda. Corporate Governance:
An International Rev. 24(3):172–180.
Anderson ML (2008) Multiple inference and gender differences in the effects of early intervention: a reevaluation of
the abecedarian, Perry preschool, and early training projects. J. American Stat. Association 103(484):1481–1495.
Anderson SJ, McKenzie D (2022) Improving business practices and the boundary of the entrepreneur: a randomized
experiment comparing training, consulting, insourcing, and outsourcing. J. Political Economy 130(1):157–209.
Ashraf N, Bandiera O, Jack BK (2014) No margin, no mission? A field experiment on incentives for public service
delivery. J. Public Econom. 120(6):1–17.
Ashraf N, Bandiera O, Lee S (2014) Awards unbundled: evidence from a natural field experiment. J. Econom. Behav.
Organ. 100(4):44–63.
Ballesteros L, Gatignon A (2019) The relative value of firm and nonprofit experience: tackling large-scale social
issues across institutional contexts. Strategic Management J. 40(4):631–657.
Bandiera O, Larcinese V, Rasul I (2015) Blissful ignorance? A natural experiment on the effect of feedback on
students’ performance. Labour Econom. 34(C):13–25.
Basinga P, Gertler PJ, Binagwaho A, Soucat AL, Sturdy J, Vermeersch CM (2011) Effect on maternal and child health
services in Rwanda of payment to primary health-care providers for performance: an impact evaluation. Lancet
377(9775):1421–1428.
Battilana J, Dorado S (2010) Building sustainable hybrid organizations: the case of commercial microfinance
organizations. Acad. Management J. 53(6):1419–1440.
Bebchuk LA, Weisbach MS (2010) The state of corporate governance research. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23(3):939–961.
Becht M, Bolton P, Roell A (2003) Corporate governance and control. Handbook of the Economics of Finance 1(1):1–
109.
Berrone P, Gelabert L, Massa-Saluzzo F, Rousseau HE (2016) Understanding community dynamics in the study of
grand challenges: how nonprofits, institutional actors, and the community fabric interact to influence income
inequality. Acad. Management J. 59(6):1940–1964.
Berry Jaeker JA, Tucker AL (2016) Past the point of speeding up: the negative effects of workload saturation on
efficiency and patient severity. Management Sci. 63(4):1042–1062.
Bertrand M, Bombardini M, Fisman R, Trebbi F (2020) Tax‐exempt lobbying: corporate philanthropy as a tool for
political influence. American Econom. Rev. 110(7):2065–2102.
35

Blader S, Gartenberg C, Prat A (2020) The contingent effect of management practices. Rev. Economic Stud.
87(2):721–749.
Blimpo MP (2014) Team incentives for education in developing countries: a randomized field experiment in Benin.
American Econom. J.: Applied Econom. 6(4):90–109.
Bloom N, Brynjolfsson E, Foster L, Jarmin R, Patnaik M, Saporta-Eksten I, Van Reenen J (2019) What drives
differences in management practices? American Econom. Rev. 109(5):1648–1683.
Bloom N, Eifert B, Mahajan A, McKenzie D, Roberts J (2013) Does management matter? Evidence from India. Quart.
J. Econom. 128(1):1–51.
Bloom N, Van Reenen J (2007) Measuring and explaining management practices across firms and countries. Quart.
J. Econom. 122(4):1351–1408.
Bode C, Singh J (2018) Taking a hit to save the world? Employee participation in a corporate social initiative. Strategic
Management J. 39(4):1003–1030.
Bowles S (2016) The Moral Economy: Why Good Incentives are no Substitute for Good Citizens (Yale University
Press, New Haven, CT).
Bruhn M, Karlan D, Schoar A (2018) The impact of consulting services on small and medium enterprises: evidence
from a randomized trial in Mexico. J. Political Economy 126(2):635–687.
Bryan KA, Tilsick A, Zhu B (2017) Which entrepreneurs are coachable and why? American Econom. Rev.
107(5):312–316.
Burbano VC (2016) Social responsibility messages and worker wage requirements: field experimental evidence from
online labor marketplaces. Organ. Sci. 27(4):1010–1028.
Cabral S, Mahoney JT, McGahan AM, Potoski M (2019) Value creation and value appropriation in public and
nonprofit organizations. Strategic Management J. 40(4):465–475.
Cai J, Szeidl A (2018) Interfirm relationships and business performance. Quart. J. Econom. 133(3):1229–1282.
Carnahan S, Kryscynski D, Olson D (2017) When does corporate social responsibility reduce employee turnover?
Evidence from attorneys before and after 9/11. Acad. Management J. 60(5):1932–1962.
Cassar L (2019) Job mission as a substitute for monetary incentives: benefits and limits. Management Sci. 65(2):896–
912.
Cassar L, Meier S (2018) Nonmonetary incentives and the implications of work as a source of meaning. J. Economic
Perspectives 32(3):215–238.
Cassar L, Meier S (2021) Intentions for doing good matter for doing well: the negative effects of prosocial incentives.
The Economic J. 131(637):1988–2017.
Chatain O, Plaksenkova E (2019) NGOs and the creation of value in supply chains. Strategic Management J.
40(4):604–630.
Chatterji A, Delecourt S, Hasan S, Koning R (2019) When does advice impact startup performance? Strategic
Management J. 40(3):331–356.
Cobb JA, Wry T, Zhao EY (2016) Funding financial inclusion: institutional logics and the contextual contingency of
funding for microfinance organizations. Acad. Management J. 59(6):2103–2131.
De Mel S, McKenzie D, Woodruff C (2014) Business training and female enterprise start-up, growth, and dynamics:
experimental evidence from Sri Lanka. J. Development Econom. 106(C):199–210.
Dimitriadis S, Koning R (2022) Social skills improve business performance: evidence from a randomized control trial
with entrepreneurs in Togo. Management Sci., forthcoming.
Dur R, Non A, Roelfsema H (2010) Reciprocity and incentive pay in the workplace. J. Economic Psychology
31(4):676–686.
Durand R, Huysentruyt M (2022) Communication frames and beneficiary engagement in corporate social initiatives:
evidence from a randomized controlled trial in France. Strategic Management J., forthcoming.
Eccles RG, Ioannou I, Serafeim G (2014) The impact of corporate sustainability on organizational processes and
performance. Management Sci. 60(11):2835–2857.
Eichler R, Levine R (2009) Performance Incentives for Global Health: Potential and Pitfalls (Center for Global
Development, Washington, DC).
Fisman R, Hubbard RG (2005) Precautionary savings and the governance of nonprofit organizations. J. Public
Econom. 89(11–12):2231–2243.
Flammer C (2015) Does corporate social responsibility lead to superior financial performance? A regression
discontinuity approach. Management Sci. 61(11):2549–2568.
Flammer C, Hong B, Minor DB (2019) Corporate governance and the rise of integrating corporate social responsibility
criteria in executive compensation: effectiveness and implications for firm outcomes. Strategic Management J.
40(7):1097–1122.
36

Flammer C, Luo J (2017) Corporate social responsibility as an employee governance tool: evidence from a quasi-
experiment. Strategic Management J. 38(2):163–183.
Gallus J, Frey BS (2016) Awards: a strategic management perspective. Strategic Management J. 37(8):1699–1714.
George G, Howard-Grenville J, Joshi A, Tihanyi L (2016a) Understanding and tackling societal grand challenges
through management research. Acad. Management J. 59(6):1880–1895.
George G, Corbishley C, Khayesi JN, Haas MR, Tihanyi L (2016b). Bringing Africa in: promising directions for
management research. Acad. Management J. 59(2):377–393.
Giorcelli M (2019) The long-term effects of management and technology transfers. American Econom. Rev.
109(1):121–152.
Glaeser EL (2002) The governance of not-for-profit firms. NBER Working Paper 8921 (National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA).
Governance Institute (2018) The Distinction between Management and Governance, 2nd edition (Governance Institute,
Lincoln, NE).
Gubler T, Larkin I, Pierce L (2016) Motivational spillovers from awards: crowding out in a multitasking environment.
Organ. Sci. 27(2):286–303.
Gubler T, Larkin I, Pierce L (2017) Doing well by making well: the impact of corporate wellness programs on
employee productivity. Management Sci. 64(11):4967–4987.
Hansmann HB (1980) The role of nonprofit enterprise. Yale Law J. 89(5):835–901.
Hanson D, Hitt MA, Ireland RD, Hoskisson RE (2017) Strategic Management: Competitiveness and Globalisation,
6th edition (Cengage, Boston, MA).
Hollowell J, Oakley L, Kurinczuk JJ, Brocklehurst P, Gray R (2011) The effectiveness of antenatal care programmes
to reduce infant mortality and preterm birth in socially disadvantaged and vulnerable women in high-income
countries: a systematic review. BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth 11(1):13.
Holmstrom B, Milgrom P (1991) Multitask principal-agent analyses: incentive contracts, asset ownership, and job
design. J. Law Econom. Organ. 7:24–52.
Huillery E, Seban J (2021) Financial incentives, efforts, and performances in the health sector: experimental evidence
from the Democratic Republic of Congo. Econom. Development and Cultural Change 69(3):1115–1164.
Iacovone L, Maloney W, McKenzie D (2022) Improving management with individual and group-based consulting:
results from a randomized experiment in Colombia. Rev. Econom. Stud. 89(1):346–371.
IEG (2014) World Bank Group Support to Health Financing (World Bank Independent Evaluation Group,
Washington, DC).
Jay J (2013) Navigating paradox as a mechanism of change and innovation in hybrid organizations. Acad.
Management J. 56(1):137–159.
Kellogg KC (2009) Operating room: relational spaces and micro-institutional change in surgery. American J. of
Sociology 115(3):657–711.
Kerber KJ, Mathai M, Lewis G, Flenady V, Erwich JJHM, Segun T, Aliganyira P, Abdelmegeid A, Allanson E, Roos
N, Rhoda N, Lawn JE, Pattinson R (2015) Counting every stillbirth and neonatal death through mortality audit
to improve quality of care for every pregnant woman and her baby. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 15(Suppl. 2):S9.
King AA, Lenox MJ (2001) Does it really pay to be green? An empirical study of firm environmental and financial
performance. J. Industrial Ecology 5(1):105–116.
Krause R, Zhiyan WU, Bruton GD, Carter SM (2019) The coercive isomorphism ripple effect: an investigation of
nonprofit interlocks on corporate boards. Acad. Management J. 62(1):283–308.
Kremer M, Miguel E, Thornton R (2009) Incentives to learn. Rev. Econom. Stat. 91(3):437–456.
Kumar HNH, Baliga SB, Kushtagi P, Kamath N, Rao SS (2022) Perinatal death auditing is necessary to identify
preventable perinatal deaths. Int. J. Prev. Med. 13:48.
Leete L (2000) Wage equity and employee motivation in nonprofit and for-profit organizations. J. Econom. Behav.
Organ. 43(4):423–446.
Linden LL, Shastry GK (2012) Grain inflation: identifying agent discretion in response to a conditional school
nutrition program. J. Development Econom. 99(1):128–138.
Mair J, Marti I, Ventresca MJ (2012) Building inclusive markets in rural Bangladesh: how intermediaries work
institutional voids. Acad. Management J. 55(4):819–850.
Mayaka MS, Muvudi Lushimba M, Bertone MP, de Borman N (2011) Le financement basé sur la performance en
République Démocratique du Congo: comparaison de deux expériences pilotes. PBF CoP Working Paper WP6
(Performance-based Financing Community of Practice, Antwerp, Belgium).
McKenzie D (2021) Small business training to improve management practices in developing countries: reassessing
the evidence for “training doesn’t work.” Oxford Rev. Econom. Policy 37(2):276–301.
37

McKenzie D, Woodruff C (2014) What are we learning from business training evaluations around the developing
world? World Bank Research Observer 29(1):48–82.
McKenzie D, Woodruff C (2017) Business practices in small firms in developing countries. Management Sci.
63(9):2967–2981.
Milgrom P, Roberts J (1988) Communication and inventories as substitutes in organizing production. Scandinavian
J. Econom. 90(3):275–289.
Milgrom P, Roberts J (1995) Complementarities and fit strategy, structure, and organizational change in
manufacturing. J. Accounting and Econom. 19(2–3):179–208.
Milgrom P, Roberts J (1990) The economics of modern manufacturing: technology, strategy, and organization.
American Econom. Rev. 80(3):511–528.
Miller G, Babiarz KS (2013). Pay-for-performance incentives in low- and middle-income country health programs.
NBER Working Paper 18932 (National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA).
Pache AC, Santos F (2013) Inside the hybrid organization: selective coupling as a response to competing institutional
logics. Acad. Management J. 56(4):972–1001.
Paul E, Albert L, N’Sambuka Bisala B, Bodson O, Bonnet E, Bossyns P, Colombo S, De Brouwere V, Dumont A,
Sèdjro Eclou D, Gyselinck K, Hane F, Marchal B, Meloni R, Noirhomme M, Noterman JP, Ooms G, Mallé
Samb O, Ssengooba F, Touré L, Turcotte-Tremblay AM, Van Belle S, Vinard P, Ridde V (2018) Performance-
based financing in low-income and middle-income countries: isn’t it time for a rethink? BMJ Global Health
3(1):1–7.
PDSS (2016) Manuel Opérationnel du Financement Basé sur la Performance (Ministry of Health, Democratic
Republic of Congo).
Quélin BV, Kivleniece I, Lazzarini S (2017) Public-private collaboration, hybridity and social value: towards new
theoretical perspectives. J. Management Stud. 54(6):763–792.
Roth A, Tucker AL, Venkataraman S (2019) Being on the productivity frontier: identifying “triple aim performance”
hospitals. Production and Operations Management 28(9):2165–2183.
Rousseau HE, Berrone P, Gelabert L (2019) Localizing sustainable development goals: nonprofit density and city
sustainability. Acad. Management Discoveries 5(4):487–513.
Saif-Ur-Rahman KM, Mamun R, Anwar I (2019) Identifying gaps in primary healthcare policy and governance in
low-income and middle-income countries: protocol for an evidence gap map. BMJ Open 2019(9):1–6.
Scally G, Donaldson LJ (1998) Clinical governance and the drive for quality improvement in the new NHS in England.
BMJ 317(7150):61–65.
Song H, Tucker AL, Murrel KL, Vinson DR (2018) Closing the productivity gap: improving worker productivity
through public relative performance feedback and validation of best practices. Management Sci. 64(6):2628–
2649.
UNICEF (2016) Maternal and Newborn Health Disparities: Democratic Republic of the Congo (UNICEF, New York,
NY).
United Nations (2018) Levels & Trends in Child Mortality (The United Nations Inter-Agency Group for Child
Mortality Estimation, New York, NY).
Vakili K, McGahan AM (2016) Health care’s grand challenge: stimulating basic science on diseases that primarily
afflict the poor. Acad. Management J. 59(6):1917–1939.
Viscusi WK, Masterman CJ (2017) Income elasticities and global values of a statistical life. J. Benefit-Cost Anal.
8(2):226–250.
WHO (2015) Democratic Republic of the Congo: Improving Aid Coordination in the Health Sector (World Health
Organization, Geneva).
WHO (2018) Children: Reducing Mortality (World Health Organization, Geneva).
WHO (2021) WHO’s 7 Policy Recommendations on Building Resilient Health Systems (World Health Organization,
Geneva).
World Bank (2018) Health System Strengthening for Better Maternal and Child Health Results Project (World Bank,
Washington, DC).
Wrzesniewski A, Schwartz B, Cong X, Kane M, Omar A, Kolditz T (2014) Multiple types of motives don’t multiply
the motivation of West Point cadets. Proceedings of the National Acad. of Sciences 111(30):10990–10995.
38

Figure 1. Examples of health centers
Source: Bluesquare.
Figure 2. Location of treated and control health centers
Notes. This figure plots the location of the health centers in the control group (blue markers) and treatment group
(green markers), for the health centers in our sample that have non-missing geo-codes (73% of the sample). The map
was generated using the online mapping software Maptive.
39

Figure 3. Dynamics of the treatment effect
A. Primary healthcare services per employee (log) B. Employees (log)
Treatment vs. control (with 95% CI) Treatment vs. control (with 95% CI)
1 0.3
0.75 0.2
0.5 0.1
0.25 0
0 -0.1
-0.25 -0.2
-0.5 -0.3
-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
C. Doctors (log) D. Nurses (log)
Treatment vs. control (with 95% CI) Treatment vs. control (with 95% CI)
0.1 0.3
0.2
0.05
0.1
0 0
-0.1
-0.05
-0.2
-0.1 -0.3
-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
E. Administrative employees (log) F. Primary healthcare services (log)
Treatment vs. control (with 95% CI) Treatment vs. control (with 95% CI)
0.2 1
0.75
0.1
0.5
0
0.25
-0.1
0
-0.2
-0.25
-0.3 -0.5
-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
40

G. Maternal and childhood healthcare services (log) H. Births (log)
Treatment vs. control (with 95% CI) Treatment vs. control (with 95% CI)
1 0.6
0.75
0.3
0.5
0.25 0
0
-0.3
-0.25
-0.5 -0.6
-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
I. Share of stillbirths (%) J. Share of neonatal deaths (%)
Treatment vs. control (with 95% CI) Treatment vs. control (with 95% CI)
0.4 0.4
0.2
0.2
0
0
-0.2
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6 -0.4
-0.8 -0.6
-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
K. Share of live births (%)
Treatment vs. control (with 95% CI)
1
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
-0.25
-0.5
-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Notes. This figure plots the coefficients from Table 5 for each outcome variable, along with their corresponding 95% confidence
intervals. The y-axis refers to the coefficients and their confidence intervals. The x-axis indicates quarters in event time, where t = 0
is the initial quarter of the PDSS intervention (Q1 2017).
41

Table 1. Summary of the PDSS intervention
Treated health centers Control health centers
Performance-based incentives  Performance is assessed along ̶
22 healthcare performance
indicators (Table A1) and a
quality score of up to 400 points
based on 15 criteria (Table A2).
 The performance-based subsidy
is then computed according to
equation (3).
Auditing & feedback Auditing ̶
 Auditors review the number of
services provided at the health
center and service quality based
on the assessment grid used to
determine the performance-
based payments.
 Auditors are assisted by local
associations whose mandate is
to cross-check the existence of
the patients indicated in the
health centers’ registries and
collect information about
patients’ satisfaction
(“community verification
system”).
Feedback
 Auditors provide feedback and
recommendations (guided by
the discrepancies between
current and target
performance); they support the
write-up of the quarterly
management plan that outlines
how the improvements can be
achieved; and they provide
training in financial and stock
management.
Transfers  Initial subsidy (“unité  Initial subsidy (“unité
d’investissement”) at the d’investissement”) at the
beginning of the program. beginning of the program.
 Quarterly performance-based  Quarterly subsidy that matches
subsidy computed according to the average subsidy paid to the
equation (3). treated health centers in the same
quarter and the same health
district. This subsidy does not
depend on the control health
centers’ own performance.
Source. PDSS (2016).
42

Table 2. Summary statistics
Obs. Mean Median Std. Dev.
Panel A. Health centers statistics
Primary healthcare services per employee 999 235.76 184.88 214.01
Employees 999 7.13 6 6.30
Doctors 999 0.06 0 0.31
Nurses 999 3.55 3 3.70
Administrative 999 3.53 3 3.37
Primary healthcare services 999 1,611 1,344 1,195
Maternal and childhood healthcare services 999 957 705 940
Births 999 53.80 45 39.46
Stillbirths (in %) 999 0.70 0 1.51
Neonatal deaths (in %) 999 0.17 0 0.68
Live births (in %) 999 99.12 100 1.76
Panel B. Population statistics
Population in center’s health area 999 11,135 9,508 7,734
Population in center’s health district 999 204,409 181,565 80,683
Notes. All variables are recorded in the quarter preceding the PDSS intervention (that is, Q4 2016).
43

Table 3. Covariate balance
Obs. Mean Median Std. Dev. p-value
(diff. means)
Panel A. Health centers statistics
Primary healthcare services per employee Treated 674 238.53 176.62 231.07 0.780
Control 325 230.02 200.29 173.55
Employees Treated 674 7.43 6 7.21 0.196
Control 325 6.50 6 3.67
Doctors Treated 674 0.06 0 0.33 0.457
Control 325 0.04 0 0.25
Nurses Treated 674 3.79 3 4.26 0.130
Control 325 3.05 3 2.03
Administrative Treated 674 3.58 3 3.66 0.710
Control 325 3.42 3 2.68
Primary healthcare services Treated 674 1,660 1,361 1,273 0.351
Control 325 1,508 1,338 1,009
Maternal and childhood healthcare services Treated 674 988 710 1,010 0.494
Control 325 892 684 770
Births Treated 674 55.71 45 41.42 0.348
Control 325 49.84 45 34.78
Stillbirths (in %) Treated 674 0.73 0 1.53 0.500
Control 325 0.64 0 1.45
Neonatal deaths (in %) Treated 674 0.18 0 0.68 0.981
Control 325 0.17 0 0.68
Live births (in %) Treated 674 99.09 100 1.772 0.584
Control 325 99.18 100 1.749
Panel B. Population statistics
Population in center’s health area Treated 674 11,090 9,491 6,377 0.896
Control 325 11,227 9,847 9,988
Population in center’s health district Treated 674 201,829 181,565 73,925 0.716
Control 325 209,760 177,275 93,047
Notes. All variables are recorded in the quarter preceding the PDSS intervention (that is, Q4 2016). The last column reports the p-value
of the difference-in-means test comparing treated and control health centers.
44

Table 4. The impact of the governance treatment on health center outcomes
Health center
operating
efficiency Health center employees Volume of healthcare services Quality of healthcare services
Primary Employees Doctors Nurses Administrative Primary Maternal and Births Share of Share of Share of
healthcare (log) (log) (log) employees healthcare childhood (log) stillbirths neonatal live births
services per (log) services healthcare (%) deaths (%)
employee (log) services (%)
(log) (log)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
Treatment × post (t = 0 to 4) 0.068 -0.003 -0.004 0.012 -0.021 0.065 0.017 0.023 0.065 -0.031 -0.034
(0.042) (0.016) (0.008) (0.028) (0.023) (0.045) (0.062) (0.040) (0.069) (0.052) (0.095)
Treatment × post (t = 5 to 9) 0.255*** -0.022 -0.008 0.032 -0.058** 0.233*** 0.149* 0.138*** -0.209*** -0.107** 0.316***
(0.059) (0.021) (0.009) (0.036) (0.029) (0.068) (0.077) (0.048) (0.072) (0.053) (0.099)
Health center fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Quarter fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
R-squared 0.561 0.785 0.739 0.643 0.769 0.523 0.565 0.564 0.290 0.323 0.355
Observations 13,986 13,986 13,986 13,986 13,986 13,986 13,986 13,986 13,986 13,986 13,986
Notes. The sample period is from Q1 2016 (t = – 4) until Q2 2019 (t = 9), where Q1 2017 (t = 0) is the quarter of the PDSS intervention. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are block-
bootstrapped at the health center level using 1,000 bootstrap replications. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
45

Table 5. Dynamics
Health center
operating
efficiency Health center employees Volume of healthcare services Quality of healthcare services
Primary Employees Doctors Nurses Administrative Primary Maternal and Births Share of Share of Share of
healthcare (log) (log) (log) employees healthcare childhood (log) stillbirths neonatal live births
services per (log) services healthcare (%) deaths (%)
employee (log) services (%)
(log) (log)
Treatment × pre (t = –4) -0.023 0.008 0.011 0.011 -0.009 -0.015 0.016 -0.013 -0.043 0.000 0.042
(0.035) (0.021) (0.009) (0.019) (0.032) (0.029) (0.056) (0.056) (0.103) (0.062) (0.130)
Treatment × pre (t = –3) 0.012 -0.024 0.005 0.012 -0.029 -0.012 0.018 -0.043 -0.005 0.002 0.003
(0.035) (0.019) (0.008) (0.018) (0.029) (0.032) (0.054) (0.057) (0.103) (0.062) (0.128)
Treatment × pre (t = –2) -0.001 -0.028 0.008 0.001 -0.011 -0.028 0.017 -0.030 -0.016 -0.031 0.048
(0.034) (0.020) (0.008) (0.017) (0.029) (0.031) (0.057) (0.051) (0.115) (0.067) (0.139)
Treatment × post (t = 0) 0.079 -0.022 -0.002 -0.008 -0.015 0.057 0.066 0.045 0.045 0.022 -0.067
(0.059) (0.020) (0.009) (0.021) (0.025) (0.053) (0.070) (0.056) (0.095) (0.070) (0.126)
Treatment × post (t = 1) 0.006 -0.000 0.004 0.024 -0.032 0.005 -0.010 -0.061 0.075 -0.057 -0.018
(0.060) (0.022) (0.007) (0.025) (0.024) (0.069) (0.083) (0.050) (0.126) (0.071) (0.153)
Treatment × post (t = 2) -0.025 -0.025 0.004 0.004 -0.026 -0.050 -0.081 -0.074 0.056 -0.047 -0.009
(0.061) (0.024) (0.007) (0.028) (0.023) (0.069) (0.081) (0.055) (0.118) (0.073) (0.150)
Treatment × post (t = 3) 0.095 0.007 0.005 0.047 -0.029 0.102 0.072 0.057 0.132 -0.047 -0.085
(0.069) (0.027) (0.008) (0.034) (0.024) (0.081) (0.095) (0.064) (0.122) (0.073) (0.155)
Treatment × post (t = 4) 0.173** -0.029 -0.001 0.025 -0.064** 0.144* 0.100 0.043 -0.066 -0.061 0.127
(0.069) (0.028) (0.008) (0.034) (0.025) (0.080) (0.090) (0.062) (0.130) (0.073) (0.156)
Treatment × post (t = 5) 0.227*** -0.024 0.006 0.048 -0.055** 0.203*** 0.141 0.069 -0.140 -0.042 0.182
(0.066) (0.028) (0.008) (0.036) (0.026) (0.079) (0.087) (0.060) (0.120) (0.068) (0.145)
Treatment × post (t = 6) 0.241*** -0.018 -0.011 0.044 -0.061** 0.223*** 0.139 0.097 -0.163 -0.044 0.207
(0.064) (0.026) (0.009) (0.032) (0.026) (0.076) (0.087) (0.060) (0.116) (0.068) (0.141)
Treatment × post (t = 7) 0.188*** -0.036 -0.009 0.054 -0.074*** 0.152** 0.131 0.109* -0.299** -0.091 0.390***
(0.064) (0.027) (0.010) (0.035) (0.028) (0.076) (0.086) (0.064) (0.119) (0.069) (0.148)
Treatment × post (t = 8) 0.206*** -0.044 -0.003 0.040 -0.086*** 0.163** 0.133 0.083 -0.279** -0.169** 0.448***
(0.068) (0.027) (0.009) (0.036) (0.028) (0.082) (0.089) (0.064) (0.124) (0.066) (0.152)
Treatment × post (t = 9) 0.399*** -0.044 0.007 0.003 -0.075*** 0.355*** 0.267** 0.225*** -0.243** -0.224*** 0.467***
(0.095) (0.031) (0.008) (0.038) (0.029) (0.111) (0.112) (0.070) (0.108) (0.078) (0.146)
Health center fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Quarter fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
R-squared 0.562 0.785 0.739 0.643 0.769 0.523 0.565 0.564 0.290 0.324 0.356
Observations 13,986 13,986 13,986 13,986 13,986 13,986 13,986 13,986 13,986 13,986 13,986
Notes. The sample period is from Q1 2016 (t = – 4) until Q2 2019 (t = 9), where Q1 2017 (t = 0) is the quarter of the PDSS intervention. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are block-
bootstrapped at the health center level using 1,000 bootstrap replications. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Table 6. Funding vs. governance
Health center
operating
efficiency Health center employees Volume of healthcare services Quality of healthcare services
Maternal
Primary Employees Doctors Nurses Administrative Primary and Births Share of Share of Share of
healthcare (log) (log) (log) employees healthcare childhood (log) stillbirths neonatal live births
services per (log) services healthcare (%) deaths (%)
employee (log) services (%)
(log) (log)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
Control vs. outside (t = 0 to 4) -0.016 0.039 0.009 0.007 0.035 0.023 0.108 0.045 -0.071 0.015 0.056
(0.069) (0.032) (0.010) (0.033) (0.048) (0.067) (0.127) (0.062) (0.131) (0.062) (0.156)
Treatment vs. outside (t = 0 to 4) 0.031 0.045 0.001 0.012 0.008 0.076 0.140 0.072 -0.050 -0.026 0.076
(0.057) (0.030) (0.008) (0.027) (0.042) (0.055) (0.104) (0.065) (0.086) (0.049) (0.109)
Control vs. outside (t = 5 to 9) 0.207 0.180*** 0.010 0.109** 0.117** 0.386** 0.470** 0.214** -0.067 -0.080 0.147
(0.174) (0.050) (0.010) (0.049) (0.057) (0.194) (0.220) (0.108) (0.116) (0.064) (0.144)
Treatment vs. outside (t = 5 to 9) 0.453*** 0.148*** 0.002 0.120*** 0.046 0.601*** 0.568*** 0.343*** -0.226*** -0.198*** 0.424***
(0.126) (0.046) (0.008) (0.041) (0.052) (0.145) (0.165) (0.079) (0.084) (0.056) (0.117)
Health center fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Pair by quarter fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
R-squared 0.527 0.648 0.703 0.643 0.607 0.552 0.553 0.582 0.259 0.241 0.300
Observations 27,972 27,972 27,972 27,972 27,972 27,972 27,972 27,972 27,972 27,972 27,972
Notes. This table presents variants of the regressions in Table 4, except that the treatment and control group are compared to health centers outside of the PDSS program (“outside” group).
Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are block-bootstrapped at the health center level using 1,000 bootstrap replications. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.
47