NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PHARMACEUTICAL PRICING AND R&D AS A GLOBAL PUBLIC GOOD
H. E. Frech, III
Mark V. Pauly
William S. Comanor
Joseph R. Martinez
Working Paper 31272
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31272
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2023
Thanks are due to Angela Chen for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by H. E. Frech, III, Mark V. Pauly, William S. Comanor, and Joseph R. Martinez, Jr.. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Pharmaceutical Pricing and R&D as a Global Public Good
H. E. Frech, III, Mark V. Pauly, William S. Comanor, and Joseph R. Martinez
NBER Working Paper No. 31272
May 2023
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
In his Labor Day address, President Biden stated that the U.S. “has the highest drug prices in the
world, and there is no reason for it.” For new branded drugs, the first part of that statement is
supported by a recent RAND Report (Mulcahy et. al. 2021) which found U.S. average prices are
2.3 times those present in both the 32 OECD countries overall and in the UK separately. In this
research, we consider the second part of that statement, and identify the economic factors that
suggest some “reasons for it.”
Viewing pharmaceutical markets through the lens of the theories of global public goods and
alliances, as developed by Olson and Zeckhauser (1966), we explain the observed pricing
differences along with their implications the for the global supply of innovative new drugs.
Similar views were advanced in two U.S. government reports (CEA 2018, 2020), and also by
Goldman and Lakdawala (2018). We develop these ideas further and implement them
empirically.
A commonly held theory presumes that drug companies in the U.S set prices for patented drugs at
profit- maximizing levels that fund and incentivize substantial research and development efforts.
In contrast, in the rest of the world (ROW), national authorities set prices minimally above
marginal costs of production, allowing few revenues remaining to support R&D (CEA Report
2018; Blumenthal 2018; Hooper and Henderson 2022). The ROW countries are then considered
to be fully free riding on U.S. research efforts. We examine this argument both theoretically and
empirically, and find it wanting.
We apply global public good theory to examine the pricing of branded drugs. To this end, we
describe the optimal global contribution, as supported by the Lindahl pricing model, and show
theoretically that existing independently determined contributions and thereby aggregate R&D
levels are likely sub-optimal. Then we implement the model by calculating the contribution to the
global public good as represented by short-term profits or quasi-rents received from sales of all
branded drugs. These calculations are derived from pricing data contained in the RAND Report
along with two market-based estimates of marginal costs.
We find that, while ROW contributions are less than those found in the United States, they are
more than minimal, and do not approach zero for most countries. When we regress these positive
contributions on a country’s size of GDP along with various controls, we find that GDP size
alone is a powerful determinant of national contributions. It remains economically and
statistically significant without regard to the controls introduced. In addition, we estimate how
large are the contributions of ROW countries to the global public good. We offer reasons why US
pharmaceutical prices and contributions per capita are nevertheless higher than those found in all
ROW countries. We also suggest actions aimed to promote R&D efforts that are closer to the
global optimum.

H. E. Frech, III William S. Comanor
Department of Economics Department of Health Policy and Management
University of California, Santa Barbara Fielding School of Public Health, UCLA
Santa Barbara, CA 93111 Los Angeles, CA 90095
frech@econ.ucsb.edu comanor@ucla.edu
Mark V. Pauly Joseph R. Martinez
The Wharton School The Wharton School of the
University of Pennsylvania University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104 Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER josma@wharton.upenn.edu
pauly@wharton.upenn.edu
1

I Introduction
In his Labor Day address, President Biden stated that the US “has the highest drug prices
in the world, and there is no reason for it” (Biden 2022)1. The first part of President Biden’s
statement, as applied to branded pharmaceuticals is undoubtedly correct. Indeed, as reported in
the recent RAND Report, (Mulcahy et. al. 2021, p. 49), US prices for “Brand Name Originator
Drugs” are more than twice the average found in 32 OECD developed countries, even after
adjusting US prices for rebates and discounts.2 While the RAND Report does not offer
explanations for these differences, that is our purpose here. Our object is to describe the
economic forces that have led US branded prices, and therefore contributions to R&D incentives,
to be much higher than those in the rest of the developed world (ROW).
For this purpose, we turn to the economic theory of public or collective goods. By
accounting for the new information embodied in branded drugs, we derive implications from this
theory for international pharmaceutical prices and quantities. To be sure, we are not the first to
consider drug prices through this lens. See the US Council of Economic Advisors (CEA)
Reports (2018, 2019), Egan and Philipson (2018), and Goldman and Lakdawalla (2018).
However, the analyses presented there were not fully developed, and our object here is to fill that
void. We develop this concept further and implement it empirically.
A commonly-held explanation for how the prices of patented drugs are determined in the
United States assumes that prices are set during periods of patent protection at monopoly profit-
maximizing levels. In contrast, national authorities in ROW countries typically set prices
1 Similar statements were made by former President Trump (Imbert 2019).
2 However, for generic drugs, prices are lower in the US than in the other countries at only 84 % of the prices for
the rest of the OECD countries. Further, generic drugs have a much larger share in the US than in other developed
countries (Mulcahy et. al. 2021, p. 49).
2

impacted by budgetary concerns with little concern for the sunk costs of pharmaceutical research
and development. Instead, they normally presume that the advanced medications pharmaceutical
R&D and the advanced medications that result from pharmaceutical R&D are entirely
exogenous. Although, US policy discussions of drug pricing issues commonly include their
likely effects on the incentives for innovation (Filson 2012; Goldman and Lakdawalla (2018);
Lackdawalla; 2018, US Congressional Budget Office (CBO) 2020), that is less common in
discussions of pricing in other countries. Indeed, there appear fewer concerns expressed by
ROW authorities about the future supply of innovative pharmaceuticals.
An important explanation for the exceptional status of US policy is the explicit legislative
mandate directed at the branded pharmaceutical industry that is embodied in the Hatch-Waxman
Act of 1984. That law has been judicially interpreted as follows
“The Act emerged from Congress’ efforts to balance two conflicting policy
objectives: to induce name-brand pharmaceutical firms to make the
investments necessary to research and develop new drug products, while
simultaneously enabling competitors to bring cheaper generic copies of those
drugs to market” (Abbott v Young, 1990).
The higher prices charged for branded pharmaceuticals during their effective patent lives are a
direct result of US law that is designed intentionally to incentivize pharmaceutical innovation.
II Promoting Pharmaceutical Innovation
Discovering new ideas to treat or prevent disease, along with establishing the safety and
efficacy of products grounded on those ideas is an expensive proposition. Current R&D costs
per new pharmaceutical agent are estimated at more than $3 billion (DiMasi 2015).
Furthermore, it has also been recognized that “marketing and innovation investments are
3

complementary” (Lakadawalla 2018, p. 438); and that extensive product advertising to
disseminate information is required for the widespread use of innovative pharmaceuticals. On
this account, promotional efforts are typically greatest at the start of a product’s life-cycle and
then declines continually through the life of the product, finally ending prior to patent expiration.
(Lakdawalla and Philipson 2012, p. 169-171, Ellison and Ellison 2007, p. 33, Bhattacharya and
Vogt, 2003, Wieringa 2012). In effect, both R&D and marketing efforts together comprise the
process by which new drugs are discovered and become widely used. Marketing is part of the
process that takes a new drug idea from concept to large scale use in a health system. R&D
spending and marketing spending are thereby complements.
Despite the high revenues received by drug companies, there is evidence that, on average,
the resulting health benefits are large, and also they are higher for more highly priced drugs. . A
recent study by Buxbaum and colleagues (2020), investigated the aggregate effects of
pharmaceuticals on the substantial increase in US life expectancy between 1990 and 2015. They
found that pharmaceuticals were second only to Public Health Measures in importance, and
contributed 35% of the overall gain. See also Lichtenberg (2005, 2007) who reported similar
overall conclusions, and also Philipson and Jena (2006) who focused on the substantial health
benefits gained from AIDS drugs. See also Frech, Pauly, Comanor, Martinez (2022) who report
that expected therapeutic gains from new pharmaceuticals, on average, exceed their incremental
costs.
The scientific information created by drug company R&D efforts, or purchased from
independent biotech companies, is embodied in the medicines offered for sale. However, since
the cost of creating the embodied scientific knowledge is largely borne before a single unit of the
drug can be sold, these expenditures represent sunk costs that support all units sold. As with all
4

sunk costs, R&D investments are recovered from differences between the prices received and
direct production and distribution costs; effectively by the difference between price and short-run
marginal costs.
Because past R&D costs are already paid, they do not directly influence the prices
charged for existing drugs. Instead, the determination of R&D outlays depends on the
anticipated connection between the incremental profits to be recovered from future new drugs
and the long-run incremental cost of inventing, testing, obtaining approval and initially
promoting new pharmaceuticals. Hence, expected markups of prices over marginal production
and distribution costs serve to incentivize R&D efforts designed to develop advanced
pharmaceutical agents.
In this setting, drug company revenues exceeding direct production and distribution costs,
represent an “investment in innovation” (Berndt et al., 2015, p. 251). Indeed, there is substantial
economic support for connections among drug prices, R&D outlays and pharmaceutical
innovation. See in particular Scherer’s report of the direct connection between overall profit
margins and R&D spending (2001). In addition, Civon and Malony (2009) find that current drug
prices are an important determinant of R&D spending (2009), and Giaccotto, Santerre and
Vernon (2005) find that prices charged for current drugs are an important determinant of the
number of prospective new drugs in the R&D pipeline (2005). Furthermore, in an early study,
Comanor provided statistical evidence of the association between R&D efforts and the number
of new pharmaceuticals where each is weighted by its sales in the first two years following
introduction (1965). More recently, Frank and Hannick find the correlation between R&D
spending and new drug approvals to be “only moderate positive at 0.58” (2022, p. 2). Unlike the
earlier study, their simple count of the number of new drugs fails to account for the inherent
5

heterogeneity across realized benefits from new drugs that makes a count of products an
unreliable index of pharmaceutical innovation.
In the analysis to follow, we assume that company revenues exceeding production and
distribution costs need not represent excess returns over costs but rather are payments that
incentivize their investment in efforts to gain pharmaceutical knowledge, data and information
which is then embodied in innovative drugs. These payments also support the promotion and
rapid diffusion of innovative pharmaceuticals that directly expands their returns and contributes
to health improvements. As such, these revenues are appropriately designated as “quasi-rents”
used to support essential sunk costs rather than monopoly profits. Indeed, in the absence of
barriers to innovation and entry, returns on investment in new drug development would earn a
competitive rate of return.3
III Pharmaceutical Information as a Global Public Good
Although drugs themselves are usually private goods, the information embodied in them,
is the essential public good we consider here. In fact, the classic example of a public good is
information, both scientific and practical (Stiglitz 1999; Cruzet, Eberly, Eisfeldt and
Papanikolaou 2022, p. 3). While often costly to produce, the use of new information by one
person or entity does not limit the amounts available for others. Indeed, this presence of “non-
rivalry” is the essential feature of all public goods: their value is not diminished by one person’s
use but remains fully available for others. In addition, information once created, is both readily
3 Consistent with free entry driving long-run profits towards zero, Grabowski and colleagues reported that the
aggregate rate of return from new drugs is close to the cost of capital. They estimated these returns at 11.5% as
compared to the estimated cost of capital of 11.0%. (Grabowski, Vernon and DiMasi, 2002).
6

disseminated and difficult to control. This potential non-excludability factor is an important
element of many public goods.
The public good concept is particularly applicable to information embodied in the
therapeutic properties of new pharmaceuticals.4 While international patent protection is
commonly used to exclude rivals from using the information during the life of the patent, this
information is readily used by generic producers upon patent expiration. At that point, the
informational public good is no longer excludable. Only temporarily does patent law makes this
public good excludable, and even then, perhaps not perfectly. The temporary excludability
permits the knowledge originator to capture some of its social benefit as “quasi-rents.”5
Were pharmaceuticals sold in a single world-wide market under a single legal and
regulatory system, policy issues would then be straight-forward, at least conceptually.
Manufacturers with appropriate temporary patent protection would then have the ability to
charge prices that incentivize both discovery and production costs. And since the former are
inherently risky, with most prospective pharmaceuticals never approved or sold, the expected
profits for successful drugs would need to be sufficient to include the costs of unsuccessful
projects. In principle, a single body could then decide how to regulate patent exclusivity to
incentivize the preferred supply of industry R&D, considering both the welfare benefits of new
knowledge and the welfare loss due to monopoly pricing of the products supplied, as well as cost
of R&D, marketing/information, production, and physical distribution.
4 One might think that direct governmental production might be superior to private production of innovative ideas
with patent protection. But, the incentives for applied R&D are generally considered to be superior for private
firms, so that form of organization is dominant in drug R&D across the world. See Stiglitz (1999, pp. 312-314) and
Jones (2022, p. 2228).
5 This concept is termed “appropriability” in the economic literature on innovation. Appropriability is generally low
for innovations, especially for new drugs (Frech, Pauly, Comanor and Martinez 2022; Philipson and Jena 2006.
7

These issues, however, are far more complicated when prospective sales are divided into
separate national markets with different national authorities that have little concern for, or even
knowledge of, global welfare. Individual countries design or accept institutional arrangements
through which prices are determined. Following a detailed review of international health care
systems, Rice aptly points out that “nearly all of the countries either set country-level
pharmaceutical prices or engage in explicit negotiations with manufacturers” through a central
authority. However, he continues, “none of these activities are carried out by the US federal
government.” (Rice 2022, p. 209).
Although US prices are set through negotiations by drug companies with multiple public
and private payers, that is not the case in ROW countries where government officials typically
exercise significant buying power. It is thus commonly suggested that, in ROW countries,
national authorities set prices that just slightly exceed the marginal cost of production, with
minimal concern for the sunk costs of R&D. Underlying this judgment is the view that drug
companies make R&D investment decisions based entirely on expected revenues in the US
market (Hooper and Henderson 2022). As a result, it is frequently presumed that, from the ROW
decision-making vantage point, pharmaceutical R&D spending and the advanced medications
that result are entirely exogenous, and countries can completely free ride on that spending if they
so choose.
This view of ROW pricing is widespread. See for example the first CEA Report, which
states that “foreign governments can insist on a price” just above marginal cost of production
(2018 p. 14). Writers for the Commonwealth Fund similarly claim that in negotiation with drug
companies, national authorities are “willing to walk away” if they are charged more than they
consider appropriate (Blumenthal 2018). Similarly, in a recent editorial, Hooper and Henderson
8

assert that the ROW countries “free ride” by using coercion to compel drug firm to accept prices
just above the marginal cost of production under the threat of refusing to buy any of the
company’s products, and firms accept this low price because “some money is better than no
money” (2022). These accounts, however, do not fit easily with common theoretical models
used to derive the supply of public goods, nor are they consistent with models in which drug
companies with sole-source products bargain with ROW countries.
In what follows, we specify alternatives to the full free-riding model, and employ
economic data to determine which account seems most applicable to the actual pattern of
pharmaceutical prices in both the US and ROW countries. Although the drugs themselves are
private goods, the information embodied in them is the essential public good emphasized here.
And it is this knowledge and information that is generated from the net product revenues
received. To be sure, it is the expected returns from new product introductions that are relevant
for discovery outlays, and not those received from prior ones. However, expectations of future
revenues are determined in large part by typical returns received from current introductions.
We employ the economic structure outlined above to model the global public good
provided through pharmaceutical innovation. For the reasons outlined above, we do not use the
number of new drugs to represent pharmaceutical innovation. Instead, we let the pharmaceutical
quasi-rents received in each OECD country represent its national contribution to the global
public good, and then consider how optimal national decision-making impacts the global
optimum. We then subject our theoretical results to empirical testing.
9

IV Economic Models Considered
In the analysis to follow, we employ game theoretic and bargaining concepts to explain
and interpret international price differences that determine national contributions to the global
public good resulting from industry R&D; which in turn affects the global availability of new
advanced pharmaceuticals. We first suggest a basic Nash non-cooperative or independent-
adjustment model in which all OECD countries are presumed to make optimal decisions for their
own constituents. That would imply negotiating the lowest possible unit price consistent with
adequate and timely supply of appropriate volumes of new effective drugs.
Despite its very different pricing structure, the United States has also adopted policies
designed to further its own purposes. While it has currently chosen a market-like process, the
US could instead have followed the path used elsewhere and require price negotiations between
drug companies and government officials. Indeed, in recent legislation, the US has moved in
that direction (Omeokwe and Hughes 2020). The US could also vary, and in fact has varied, the
length and breadth of regulatory and patent-based exclusivity along with other policies that will
affect the profitability of drug innovation. Through such actions, the US has effectively
determined its contribution to the global public good.6
We also consider two alternate models to the one proposed above. In the first of them,
ROW authorities are concerned not only with setting low prices but also account for the
prospective effects on industry research and development.7 Often, this approach takes the form
of “value-based pricing” by which government authorities reward drug companies for
6 For a good discussion of the “balancing act” that governments in general do regarding the levels and duration of
exclusivity and therefore the share of the social value of an innovation received by the innovator, see (Stiglitz 1999,
pp. 311-313).
7 For more discussion of this type of Nash model, see Egan and Philipson (2013).
10

introducing higher quality products at prices that may exceed the marginal cost of production.
For example, Ekelund and Phersson (2003) provide relevant data on this model for Sweden.
A second alternate model suggests itself. Suppose drug companies do not accept the low
prices proposed by ROW authorities for new innovative drugs but instead require higher prices
for a timely supply, or even for any willingness to supply their new drugs at all. On this point,
there is evidence that low ROW government-imposed prices have led to a “drug lag” in which
drug entry dates are postponed for some years following the earlier US entry (Danzon and
Furukawa, 2008). Furthermore, US approved drugs are “refused public reimbursement or not
recognized for public reimbursement” in Australia, Canada and the UK. (Pham, Le, Draves and
Seoane-Vazuez 2023, p. E.1) Hence there is a bargaining process whose outcome may well be a
price in excess of MC. This process has been modeled with the Nash bargaining model, leading
to intermediate prices where the consumer surplus resulting from the new drug is shared between
the innovator and consumers (CBO 2019, p.8).
V. The Global Optimum Quantity of the R&D Public Good and the Lindahl Model
We now define a first-best optimum for the global economy in order to contrast it with
projected outcomes from the various models, and also what is empirically observed. To this end,
we recount Samuelson’s theoretical characterization of the optimal supply of a public good
(1954; 1955).
Assume provisionally that all prospective drugs have a uniform expected R&D cost prior
to launch (including the cost of failure) of $R per drug. Assume also that officials from each
OECD country set policies to align with the median preferences of their country’s citizenry. And
let the average per capita value of the health benefits resulting from prospective drug j be V . In
j
11

that case, Samuelson’s optimal decision rule would be to set prices such that the country’s
population times V just equals or exceeds $R after accounting for the R&D costs of all drugs
i
provided. That judgment embodies Samuelson’s optimality condition determined by the “sum of
marginal rates of substitution” (1955, p. 353). In other words, the optimal quantity of the public
good is achieved when marginal cost equals the sum of the relevant demand prices.
A means to achieve global optimality would be to employ the Lindahl, or marginal
benefit, model. That model presumes that each country pays an amount towards the public good
just equal to its relative valuations, V’s, at the optimal quantity. In other words, all countries
i
who benefit from the public good at the margin pay their demand price for the quantity supplied.
The resulting equilibrium then satisfies the Samuelson condition for optimality.
While global optimality for aggregate R&D outlays can therefore be defined, it is not
readily achieved in the presence of multiple independent countries. Even if there were agreement
on the principle of value-based contributions, each government is strongly incentivized to
understate its valuation to reduce its contribution without appreciably affecting the availability to
its citizens of new, advanced pharmaceuticals. That motivation is especially strong in small
countries. As there is no higher authority to enforce Lindahl behavior, each country’s
commitment to serve its population’s interests may well lead to the under-provision of this
global public good. While Lindahl equilibrium quantities are optimal and provide a useful
standard, that model by itself is not incentive-compatible, and therefore is implausible as an
explanation of what actually occurs.
12

VI. Applying the Theory of Public Goods to New Pharmaceuticals
As presumed earlier, advanced pharmaceuticals lead to improved health status for all
countries’ citizenry. This strong commonality of interest suggests the possibility of an implicit,
if not explicit, alliance among OECD nations designed to foster the development and
introduction of beneficial new drugs. On this basis, we turn to the economic theory of alliances
for insight as to how member nations would be expected to conduct their affairs.
At the start of their discussion, Olson and Zeckhauser acknowledge that, “it may well be
that most alliances are never embodied in any formal agreement” (Olson and Zeckhauser 1966b,
p.273). They emphasize that it is not the presence of a signed agreement that signifies an
alliance but rather the reality that all members benefit from whatever communal efforts everyone
is willing to take.
The Olson/Zeckhauser paper focused on the global public good of national defense
against aggression. It posits two important features of most alliances. The first is that
“individuals (here countries) acting independently do not have an incentive to provide optimal
amounts of such (collective) goods” (Olson and Zeckhauser 1966b, p. 267), a proposition that
was later elaborated by Pauly (1970) and Sandler and Cauley (1975). Suboptimal provision is
expected even when “individual members have an incentive to make significant sacrifices to
obtain the collective good” (Olson and Zeckhauser 1966b, p. 268). In effect, where all countries
pursue only their own national interests, the likely outcome will generally fall short of the
optimal provision of the communal good.
They also recognized a second important feature of many alliances: “there will also be a
tendency for the ‘larger’ members – those that place a higher absolute value on the public good –
to bear a disproportionate share of the burden” (Olson and Zeckhauser 1966b, p. 268). In effect,
13

the larger members who may be more invested in the alliance will commonly bear the larger per
capita costs.
In the analysis that follows, we apply this theoretical apparatus to the pricing of new
branded pharmaceuticals. The critical factor here is that the quasi-rents, or net revenues,
expected from established prices reflect a country’s contribution to the global public good of
pharmaceutical innovation. This approach offers a very different lens through which to view
drug industry net revenues than those who believe that pharmaceutical profits are a negative
factor that should be limited. See for example DeAngelis (2016) and Anderson (2014). Viewing
expected returns as contributions that incentivize the production of an important global public
good places these returns in a very different light.
In the discussion below, we avoid discussing the diverse political issues pertaining to the
prices paid and the revenues received in individual countries. Instead, we presume that all
measures taken depend entirely on the country’s underlying economic conditions. By adopting
this approach, we adopt the presumption that “states internationally behave like private actors,
motivated by national self-interest,” which is an approach commonly pursued in both the
economic and political science literatures on alliances and international cooperation (Kaul,
Grunberg and Stern 1999, p. 15). Our analysis, therefore, presumes that the relevant authorities
in each country select a pharmaceutical pricing strategy that maximizes their countries’ social
welfare including the discovery and development of innovative pharmaceuticals, but do not
consider any benefits that accrue elsewhere.8
8 Similar presumptions underlie works by Eagan and Philipson (2013) and the US CEA (2018; 2020).
14

VII. The Nash Non-cooperative Model
While the economics developed below is similar to that offered originally by Olson and
Zeckhauser, we employ the more formal approach of Bergstrom, Blume and Varian (1986). We
model the volume of the relevant public good as the aggregate number of homogeneous new
beneficial drugs (here assumed to have the same marginal health benefits per capita), and also
identical R&D costs. While these presumptions permit a more tractable analysis, they do not
detract from the insights gained.
Consider a world of n countries, with each one potentially purchasing pharmaceuticals at
prices above the marginal cost of production and distribution. Net revenues then incentivize the
global public good of pharmaceutical innovation. In such circumstances, each country
contributes to the quasi-rents that motivate industry efforts. Let there be diminishing returns to
an increased number of new drugs resulting from declining marginal valuations of the life-years
gained. In that case, the total number of new advanced drugs developed, Q, is supported by the
total contributions of n countries divided by the (assumed uniform) cost of the R&D sufficient to
produce one additional drug, indicated by R.
In contrast, x is the consumption of an aggregate, countrywide private good in country i.
i
Each country is modeled as having a well-behaved utility function for two goods reflecting both
its own consumption of the private good and also the global aggregate of innovative new drugs
that results from the public good supplied by international drug companies. There is therefore no
country subscript on the public good, Q, for countries that consume the new, more efficacious
pharmaceuticals.
In these circumstances, each country’s officials are presumed to maximize their nation’s
utility:
15

𝑢𝑢𝑖𝑖(𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖,𝑄𝑄)
where each country is endowed with wealth, , that is divided between the private composite
good x,, and its contribution to the public goo𝑤𝑤d 𝑖𝑖 defined above. Each country then decides how
i
much, if any, it will contribute towards the global public good that produces and distributes
future new drugs, aggregated over all drugs currently consumed. Throughout, each country
recognizes that its contributions subtract from its consumption of all other goods.
Finally, let each county comply with the conventional Nash behavioral assumption that
its utility-maximizing contribution will not affect the contributions of any other country. In
effect, each country’s contribution is then its best response to the contributions of all other
countries.
Under these conditions, we can define a Nash equilibrium of contributions to the global
public good that incentivizing future drug development indicated by the vector of contributions
by all countries . In equilibrium, for each country i, R is the solution to the
i
∗
following: : (𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖),𝑖𝑖 = 1,2…𝑛𝑛
Max U (x Q)
i i,
subject to the budget constraint:
w = x +R
i i i,
and also, the underlying production function for transforming contributions into the public good.
Note that each country’s decisions are impacted by the current level of contributions (if any) by
all other countries toward global R&D. As a result, the sum of world-wide revenues exceeding
16

short-run marginal costs determines the aggregate returns from pharmaceutical innovation and
thereby the expected value of improved pharmaceuticals.
In a Nash model with an interior equilibrium, more than one country would willingly
contribute payment toward the global public good. This outcome is consistent with the analysis
of Egan and Philipson (2013). However, a Nash corner equilibrium is also possible where one
country voluntarily contributes a large amount to the global public good to which no other
country contributes anything. That result is consistent with both the CEA Reports and the
Hooper/Henderson editorial. In that scenario, each ROW country pays just enough for its drugs
consumed to cover the marginal cost of production and distribution, while high US prices
contributes so large an amount that other countries’ valuation of additional new drugs falls short
of R. Other ROW countries therefore contribute nothing to the global public good despite
benefiting from its availability. It is also possible for some countries to be at a corner solution
and contribute little or nothing to the public good while others reach an interior solution and
contribute a significant amount.
Note that in the Nash/Alliances model, contributions to support the public good are
strategic substitutes. Whenever one country contributes more, each other countriy contributes
less, but instead spends more on its own country’s consumption of available private goods. The
analysis of a simplified two-country version of this model is therefore analogous to the two-firm
Cournot model. If the reaction functions do not cross, a corner solution occurs and one country
makes the entire contribution to the public good. But instead, if the reaction functions intersect,
and so long as the public good is a normal good, an equilibrium with more than one county
contributing to the public good exists and is stable (Cornes, Hartley and Sandler 1999). An
interior equilibrium outcome is portrayed in Figure 1. In this graph the US and aggregate ROW
17

reaction functions cross at the Nash non-cooperative equilibrium where the US contribution is
US* and the ROW contribution is ROW*.
In Figures 2, 3 and 4, we offer simplified versions of three possible outcomes. In each
figure, the horizontal axis is the private good consumed by individual country i while the vertical
axis is the public good supported by all countries, Q. Line segment AD represents the overall
budget constraint faced by an individual country. However, the amount on each graph
∗
indicates the aggregate amount that all other countries (not i) contribute to𝑄𝑄 − th 𝑖𝑖 e global public good
such that under the Nash behavioral presumption, the operative portion of the budget constraint
for any single country is limited to the segment AB. In these graphs, the contribution of all other
countries is held constant at ; while they differ according to the country’s demand conditions
∗
for the global public good. T𝑄𝑄h − e 𝑖𝑖 segment BD is not available since contributions to the public
good cannot be negative.
Represented in the three figures are three types of countries, described with three
different utility functions. Figure 2) denotes a high-demand country that contributes a great deal
to the public good, ; Figure 3) describes a medium-demand country that contributes a small
∗
positive amount, wh𝐶𝐶i 𝑖𝑖 le Figure 4) represents a low-demand country that contributes nothing. Its
best outcome is thereby represented as a corner solution. As noted above, it is theoretically
possible that only one country contributes to the public good while the outcomes of all others are
depicted as corner solutions.
18

VIII. Alternate Pricing Behavior and Policy Options
As suggested above, Nash outcomes leading to interior solutions may exist where some
or all ROW countries contribute substantially to the global public good, even though the
contribute less than required for a Lindahl optimum. Particularly since US contributions are so
substantial, some large ROW countries may prefer the interior solution represented in Figure 3,
while some small ROW countries may be expected to choose the corner solution represented in
Figure 4, thus completely free riding on the contributions of larger countries.
Because contributions depend on prices negotiated with drug companies, bilateral
bargaining between ROW countries and drug companies may arise. In that case, each side will
have something to lose if an agreement is not reached. While companies would lose the
prospective returns from lack of an agreement, the countries would lose their timely access to
advanced new drugs. In that case, one might expect an outcome in which prices exceed marginal
cost, but fall short of monopoly levels.
Another alternative is represented by the widespread belief that “value-based pricing” is
the appropriate structure through which regulatory prices should be set.9 In this paradigm, ROW
countries would choose to reward successful high-value innovation by paying higher prices, –
without regard to production costs. While such prices may incentivize R&D efforts to some
extent, they appear less consequential than the market-based incentives found in the United
States. Another feature of this approach is that it is derived as an independent concept rather than
from the country’s national interests; and as such without regard to its underlying utility function
9 See the arguments advanced in (Neumann 2021).
19

Despite the incentive problems inherent in the Lindahl model of public goods, inferior
outcomes could be avoided through international agreement. Efforts to create multi-country
agreements involving higher revenues received in ROW countries while keeping US generated
revenues at current levels would be a step in that direction. That approach would resemble
international trade agreements that convert the underlying circumstances from a non-cooperative
to a cooperative game. We interpret the two CEA reports on this subject (2018; 2020) as
advocating this approach.
IX. Evidence on How Drug Prices Determine Contributions for the Global Public Good
Because pharmaceutical prices that exceed marginal production and distribution costs
incentivize and guide the production of the global public good of pharmaceutical innovation, we
seek evidence on the prices paid for new branded pharmaceuticals. Fortunately, useful price
indices for 33 OECD countries in 2018 have recently become available which can be used for
this purpose. See the data provided in the recent RAND Report (Mulcahy et. al. 2021). That
study covers all OECD countries that are the main potential source of contributions to this global
public good, represented here by pharmaceutical spending minus the marginal costs of
production and distribution.
A country’s contribution to the global public good of pharmaceutical innovation is given
by the proportion of the sales revenue in that country that exceeds MC times
𝑡𝑡ℎ ′ (𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖 −𝑀𝑀𝐶𝐶)
𝑡𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑒 𝑖𝑖 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑢𝑢𝑛𝑛𝑡𝑡𝐶𝐶𝑦𝑦 𝑠𝑠 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑛𝑛𝑡𝑡𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖𝐶𝐶𝑢𝑢𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑖𝐶𝐶𝑛𝑛 = 𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖
𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖
20

where is price index of innovative drugs in country i, is the associated innovative drug
revenue𝑃𝑃s 𝑖𝑖 , and MC is the estimated marginal cost assumed𝑆𝑆 𝑖𝑖 the same in all countries. That
assumption of identical marginal cost values is clearly an abstraction because the MC includes
both manufacture and distribution costs; and it is likely that distribution costs are lower in low-
wage countries. The price indices and revenues refer to brand-name originator drugs which
embody the advanced knowledge created by prior R&D outlays.
The relative prices from the RAND Report need be transformed from their reported
values which are US prices relative to OECD prices, and thereby provide price premiums in
percentage terms:
𝑡𝑡ℎ 𝑃𝑃𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈
𝑈𝑈𝑆𝑆 𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖𝑃𝑃𝑒𝑒 𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝑒𝑒𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖𝑢𝑢𝑃𝑃 𝑓𝑓𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑡𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑒 𝑖𝑖 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑢𝑢𝑛𝑛𝑡𝑡𝐶𝐶𝑦𝑦 = (100)
𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖
For our purposes, we transform those price indices into proportions of the corresponding
US prices. To this end, we invert the published indices for the innovative drugs, and multiply by
100 so that the price index for the ith country is:
1
𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖 = 𝑡𝑡ℎ (100)
𝑈𝑈𝑆𝑆 𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖𝑃𝑃𝑒𝑒 𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝑒𝑒𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖𝑢𝑢𝑃𝑃 𝑓𝑓𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑡𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑒 𝑖𝑖 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑢𝑢𝑛𝑛𝑡𝑡𝐶𝐶𝑦𝑦
For example, the price index for brand-name originator drugs for the UK is calculated as 43% or
0.43, which indicates the UK price index is 43% of the US index for the corresponding branded
drugs. Coincidentally, the value for the total of all ROW countries is also 43% of the US index.
To calculate the sales revenue for branded originator drug using the RAND report data.
(p. 19, col 1), we multiply reported total sales by the proportion of total sales due to brand-name
originator drugs (p. 20, col 1):
21

𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖 = (𝑇𝑇𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖)(𝐵𝐵𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖)
where TS = Total Sales,and BS = Brand Share. In addition, both population (POP) and real 2018
i i
GDP values in 2018 US dollars are available in the Penn World Tables (Feenstra, Inklaar and
Timmer 2015).
Returning to the UK example, we find total brand name sales of
S = ($23.B)(0.71) = $16.83B.
UK
At this point, we require estimates of marginal costs. For this purpose, we use two
alternate, market-based approaches. The first is simply to derive MC values from the RAND
Report data on price indices. Since firms will not profitably set prices below marginal costs, a
possible approach is to use the prices index of the lowest paying country, Turkey, as providing a
rough estimate of marginal cost. This simple procedure provides a value of 14.2% of the US
price index. This estimate, however, may be too low; perhaps influenced by either a very
different basket of drugs or lower distribution costs in this low-income country.
A second approach rests on estimates of pharmaceutical marginal costs available in the
economic literature and summarized in a recent CEA Report. The CEA estimates MC as 16% of
list price on average for branded drugs in the US, ignoring rebates and discounts (CEA 2018,
p.24). That estimate is based on data from studies that also calculate the average US price
declines resulting from generic entry. (Caves et. al 1992; Grabowski and Vernon 1992; Brendt
and Aitken 2011). The fundamental concept employed here is that prices approach marginal
22

costs when substantial generic entry occurs. The CEA reviewed these studies and reported that
the average estimated price decline following large-scale generic entry over the studies reviewed
is 84%, implying average marginal costs of 16% of the earlier list price (CEA 2018, p. 24). This
estimate, however, must be adjusted for the average US rebate of 33 percent for branded drugs,
(Mulcahy et. al. 2021, p. 25). In that case, we estimate an average MC value of 24% of net US
prices, or 0.24.10
In the analysis below, we use both MC estimates to calculate alternate national
contributions to the global public good. While the there are some quantitative differences in
our calculations, the results are qualitatively the same. The basic results and insights are not
sensitive to the specific value of MC employed.
A. Calculating Contribution to the Public Good
1. MC from the RAND Report
Using the RAND estimate of MC at 14.2% of the US price, each country’s contribution
to the global public good can be determined as:
[𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖 −(𝑃𝑃𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈)(0.142)]
(𝑇𝑇𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖)(𝐵𝐵𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖)
𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖
An example is the UK contribution to the global public good, which is determined as
0.43−0.142
($23.7𝐵𝐵)(0.71) = $11.23𝐵𝐵
0.43
10 Note that using an MC value of 0.24 will lead to negative contributions for three lower-income countries: Turkey,
Greece and Estonia so their logarithms do not exist. In sensitivity tests, dropping or including the observations for
these three countries in a linear version of this model made almost no difference. See below.
23

Alternatively, for the US, we have:
[𝑃𝑃𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 −(𝑃𝑃𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 )(0.142)]
𝑆𝑆𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈
which provides a US contribution of:
𝑃𝑃𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈
1.0−0.142
($464.0)(0.82) = $326.44𝐵𝐵
1.0
As reported here, the UK contribution is about 3.5% of the US contribution. As the UK
population is about 20% of the US population, the UK contribution per capita would then be
about 18% of the US per capita contribution.
2. MC from the Literature
As noted above, the CEA estimate of marginal cost is 24% of the US index. Using that larger
estimate, we calculate somewhat different estimates for each country’s contribution to the global
public good. For the UK, we find:
0.43−0.24
($23.7𝐵𝐵)(0.71) = $7.44𝐵𝐵
0.43
In contrast, for the US we have:
1.0−0.24
($464.0)(0.82) = $289.16𝐵𝐵
1.0
The higher estimate of MC leads to a larger reduction in the UK’s calculated contribution
relative to the US so the UK percentage is lower. With this estimate of MC, the UK’s percentage
24

would then equal about 2.6% of the US contribution, and about 13% of the US contribution per
capita.
The calculated contributions of all OECD countries are provided in Table 3. While the
US is much the largest contributor to the relevant global public good, many OECD countries
contribute substantially. The US alone is not the sole source of incentives for world-wide
pharmaceutical innovation.
B. The Implied US Percentage of Global Contribution
1. MC from the RAND Report
As noted above, the US contribution is: $326.44B. In contrast, the ROW contribution
(proxied by the rest of the OECD) is:
0.43−0.142
($331.2)(0.73) = $164.28𝐵𝐵
These calculations indicate that0 t.h4e3 US contribution is approximately 66 percent of the total.
That figure is broadly consistent with prior estimates of between 64 and 78% (Goldman and
Lakdawalla 2018), and also with a study (Chen, Pauly, Comanor and Frech forthcoming) using a
different approach.
2. MC from the Literature
Using this MC estimate, the US contribution is $289.16B. In contrast, the ROW
contribution is:
0.43−0.24
($331𝐵𝐵)(0.73) = 106.83𝐵𝐵
In this case, the US contribution0 r.e4p3resents about 73% of the total.
25

3. National Contributions
See Tables 1 and 2 for descriptive statistics of this data set as well as correlation
coefficients across the relevant variables. In Table 3, we report all national contributions derived
from both MC estimates, along with other data. The most striking feature of these data is the
position of the United States. Indeed, when MC is estimated at 24% of the US price index, the
US accounts for 72% of the OECD total; while when MC is estimated at 14.2%, its share is
slightly lower at 67%. Japan and Germany, also make substantially above-average
contributions, although far smaller than that of the United States. On a per capita basis as well,
the US predominance is evident with contributions of $884 and $998 respectively. In the
presence of such disparities, the US may be the only OECD country consistent with Figure 2.
In contrast, there are a number of countries with minimal contributions per capita. See
for example the values reported for Chile, Mexico and Turkey. In such instances, the corner
solution depicted in Figure 4 appears more likely with minimal contributions made to the global
public good. For most OECD countries, however, it appears that the intermediate position
suggested in Figure 3 is more representative as they make substantial contributions to the global
public good.
C. Free-Riding by ROW Countries is Only Partial
As indicated in Table 3, various OECD countries make substantial contributions to the
global public good of pharmaceutical innovation. They provide amounts of between $115 billion
and $164 billion per year, which represents between 27% and 33% of total global support for the
public good.
26

The average ROW country pays between 1.8 and 3 times MC, depending on the estimate
of MC employed. However, there appears to be considerable variation among the ROW
countries in our sample. The notion that other advanced countries are all paying near MC, and
thus largely free-riding, is not supported by these data. It is therefore not the case that the US
alone incentivizes pharmaceutical innovation
To be sure, a substantial amount of free riding by ROW countries appears to remain.
While US annual per capita contributions approach $1000 annually, the next higher countries are
Switzerland at between $264 and $354, Japan at between $227and $318, and Canada between
$209 and $286. All other OECD countries contributed even less per capita to the global public
good.
X. Determinants of Contributions: Empirical Estimates
A. Basic Approach and Variable Definitions
To determine national support levels for this global public good, we estimate single-
equation OLS models explaining differences in national contributions among the OECD
countries included in the RAND report. As emphasized in prior economic studies of investment
in drug innovation (Acemoglu and Linn 2004), our primary explanatory variable is the size the
economy, measured simply by national GDP.11
The underlying theoretical construct is that a country’s economic size determines the total
value of the public good consumed by its citizens, both because larger populations imply more
people to benefit from a new drug and also because higher GDP per capita is associated with
11 For more on measures of country size for global public good problems, see (Shresta and Feehan 2002/2003).
Specifications with GDP per capita and population entered separately had far lower explanatory power than using
total GDP alone because entering these variables separately imposes an inappropriate functional form.
27

higher monetary values of improved health. Indeed, the demand for this public good, as derived
from the demand for health, has generally been found to have a positive income elasticity of
nearly 1.0 for non-US countries (Hammitt and Robinson, 2011; Viscusi and Masterman 2017).
In addition, there is the prospect that nations with large pharmaceutical industries will
permit higher prices and thereby contribute more to the global public good in response
presumably to pressures from its national companies. In that case, a country’s contribution
might exceed those from countries with minimal drug industries. We account for this possibility
by sequentially adding indicator variables for the ROW countries with substantial drug
industries: the US, Japan, Germany and Switzerland.
As before, we employ alternate market-based estimates of MC: 14.2% and 24% of the
US price index in calculating estimates of a nation’s contribution to the global public good.
These alternatives lead to different dependent variables of a country’s pharmaceutical sales
above marginal cost. As before, they are derived from the RAND data as follows:
𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖 = (𝑇𝑇𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖)(𝐵𝐵𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖)
where the first term in this expression is the pharmaceutical total sales volume and the second is
the proportion of those sales of branded originator drugs. In addition, the 2018 population
(POP) and real GDP values in 2018 US dollars are drawn from the Penn World Table (Feenstra,
Inklaar and Timmer 2015).
B. Specifications
The baseline specification is a two-variable linear regression equation:
28

𝐶𝐶𝑖𝑖 = 𝛼𝛼+𝛽𝛽1𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖 +𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖
although we also estimate equations with indicator variables for the US, Japan, Germany and
Switzerland. The equations are estimated in natural logs for the continuous variables so the
estimated coefficients represent elasticities.
C. Empirical Findings
1. Main Results for Country GDP Size
A country’s GDP explains a large share of its contribution to the global public good. See
Table 4 where MC is estimated at 14.2% of the US price index. The simple linear regression that
includes ln GDP alone explains 89% of the variation in contributions across countries, and is
highly significant at better than the 1% level, with a t-statistic of 16. See Table 4, Column 1.
Furthermore, the size effect as reflected by its GDP is quantitatively large with an estimated
point elasticity of 1.23. In addition, the arc elasticity indicating the effect of a doubling of GDP
is even higher at 1.45, due to the non-linear property of a logarithmic equation.12 In this case,
this estimated equation projects that, on average, doubling GDP would lead to increased
contributions to the Global Public Good by 145%.
This estimated equation also provides a direct test of the hypothesis that in collective
efforts, there is a tendency of the “small ‘exploiting’ the large,” that is commonly referred to as
the “exploitation” hypothesis. In contrast, if public good contributions were made
12 Doubling GDP raises lnGDP by 0.7, so that lnCont increases by (0.7)(1.23)=0.86. Taking the antilog, this raises
Cont by 1.45 or 145%.
29

proportionately to a country’s GDP, with a regression coefficient close to 1.0, the hypothesis
would not be supported.
The findings presented above describe a strong, economically significant size effect such
that national contributions to the global public good are estimated to increase more than
proportionately relative to increases in a country’s GDP. Note also that the estimated elasticity
coefficient in Table 4, Column (1) is significantly greater than unity, where the null hypothesis is
an estimated coefficient of unity. In this case, the relevant t-statistic is 2.95 (0.23/0.078), which
is statistically significant at the 1.0% level in a two tailed test. These findings are consistent
with the “exploitation” hypothesis.
To separate a US effect from a more generalized size effect, we introduce a US indicator
variable, as reported in Table 4, Column 2. In that case, the US variable is highly statistically
and economically significant but the generalized size effect also remains statistically and
economically significantly different from zero. While the estimated GDP coefficient is slightly
lower than before at 1.17 rather than 1.23, it remains both statistically and economically
significant, with a t-statistic of 14. This result suggests that the underlying size-contribution
relationship is not dependent only on the US observation. Despite its large size and contribution,
the US effect does not determine the underlying size effect. Instead, the size relationship
predicted by the Nash interior equilibrium model continues to explain a large degree of variation
in global public good contributions among non-US OECD countries.
In addition, the “exploitation” hypothesis is again supported although the evidence is
somewhat weaker with increased variability. The comparable test statistic based on the estimates
provided in Table 4, Column 2 is now 2.0 (0.17/0.085) which is statistically significant at the
10.0% level and nearly statistically significant at the 5% level. Even after accounting for the
30

distinct US effect, the “exploitation” hypothesis that larger countries bear a disproportionately
large share of contributions to the global public good is supported by the statistical evidence.
We next add indicator variables for three other countries with notable pharmaceutical
industries: Japan, Germany and Switzerland. These variables are all positive and, except for
Germany, statistically significant at the 5% level. This finding suggests that having a domestic
drug industry affects a nation’s calculus of the country-level benefits conveyed by this global
public good. Since some quasi-rents are captured by firms in these countries, there are national
benefits from encouraging larger contributions. Most important, adding those additional
indicator variables slightly reduces the estimated size effect (from 1.17 to 1.13), but even at its
smaller value, it remains economically and statistically significantly different from zero..
However, as expected precision declines with the full set of indicators, partly because the
dummies reduce the effective variation in the data. The GDP coefficient is no longer statistically
significantly greater than unity. There is thus strong evidence supporting the “exploitation”
hypothesis for the full sample of countries, although the evidence gets weaker once one accounts for the
two or three largest countries—because presumably there is less of a systematic relationship between
GDP and contribution in that case. Empirical support for the “exploitation” hypothesis among the
remaining countries is thereby less powerful when both the US and Japanese markets are
separately indicated. Furthermore, this support remains despite the presence of reference pricing
and trans-shipments that tend to suppress cross-country variation among OECD countries.
(Schweitzer and Comanor 2011; Danzon 2018; Salant 2022; Maini and Passamoli 2023)).
The prior discussion rests on findings associated with the smaller estimate of MC, and we
now consider these issues with estimates based on our higher estimate of MC at 24% of the US
price index. See the empirical results reported in Table 5, Column 1. Qualitatively similar, these
31

results show slightly larger size effects, with an estimated elasticity of contribution with respect
to size of about 4% higher. Again, this equation fits the data well. Furthermore, the effects of the
indicator variables are roughly similar to those found earlier, especially for the US and Japan.
Overall, these estimates are somewhat less precise than those reported earlier. The results are
robust to alternative assumptions on MC.
Again, the lowest estimates for the generalized size effect appears in the most complete
equation that includes indicator variables for all four countries. In this case, with higher
presumed marginal costs, the estimated size effects are slightly larger than before.
D. Sensitivity Tests
To check for possible data and functional form issues, we performed various sensitivity
tests. First, we estimated the regression equations in linear rather than logarithmic form for the
continuous variables. The results were similar to the earlier findings. Next, we now included
observations for Turkey, Greece and Estonia that had been discarded from the logarithmic
version because of zero or negative contributions. This variant made almost no difference to the
GDP estimated coefficients.
We also relaxed our assumption that the instruments chosen to affect the contribution to
the global pubic good were completely endogenous with respect to the country’s intended
contribution. We did that by entering variables for the out-of-pocket cost of health care and for
the threshold value of the cost-effectiveness required by national authorities or insurance
companies to accept a drug for payment. Neither was significant at the 10% level, though the
CE threshold was close to statistical significance in one specification. Most important, the size
32

effect was little affected by the presence of these variables. Thus, the basic results appear highly
robust to alternative specifications.
XI. Discussion
In his classic treatment of public goods, Olson emphasized that “the satisfaction of any
common interest means that a public or collective good has been provided for that group”
(Olson 1971, p. 15). Since the development of new, therapeutically advanced medicines are
valued in all countries, efforts to discover and develop them clearly represent a global public
good. In this study, we explore the implications of explicitly acknowledging that pharmaceutical
research and development has major benefits globally.
Olson draws two significant implications from his analysis when applied to small groups
of beneficiaries, in this case the OECD countries. His first conclusion is that “there is a tendency
in small groups towards a sub-optimal provision of collective goods.” Furthermore, “the larger
the number in the group, … the more serious the sub-optimality will be” (Olson 1971, p. 28).
Applied to pharmaceutical innovation, this conclusion translates to a recognition that the greater
the number of smaller countries benefiting from R&D outlays, the more the aggregate
underinvestment in these efforts, and the lower the level of pharmaceutical innovation.
The second of Olson’s implications is even more striking. “The member with the largest
[share of prospective benefits] will bear a disproportionate share of the burden…. [such that]
there is a systematic tendency for ‘exploitation’ of the great by the small” (Olson, 1971, p. 29).
Applied to the global public good of pharmaceutical R&D, a greater burden would then be
shouldered by the largest member of the group. Since support for this public good is determined
by the quasi-rents received from branded pharmaceutical sales, which are far greater in the
33

United States than elsewhere, Olson’s analysis thereby predicts the higher revenues and prices
paid for branded, originator pharmaceuticals in the United States than elsewhere.
In this study, we consider spending on pharmaceuticals above the levels required to cover
marginal production and distribution costs through a lens that emphasizes their support of the
global public good of pharmaceutical R&D. In this construct, these outlays represent an
investment in pharmaceutical innovation that delivers large worldwide social returns. These
revenues are considered as “quasi-rents” rather than monopoly profits in that they incentivize
and guide essential sunk costs. Indeed, we consider this manner of funding such costly efforts as
the only practical way to accomplish that result.
When seen in this light, the conclusions stated above are particularly relevant. There is
clearly a world-wide interest in supporting the development of new therapeutically valuable
medications; and this commonality of interest provides the basis for this global public good.
Furthermore, as widely acknowledged, such goods are likely to be under-supplied.
In our analysis, we define a Lindahl equilibrium that represents worldwide optimality, but
also consider the factors that make its achievement unlikely. Most important among them is the
presence of independent and self-interested behavior that leads support for this public good to
fall short of the worldwide ideal level. However, where officials at ROW countries base their
buying prices on perceived product values rather than on cost-minimization objectives, or where
drug companies can bargain effectively for prices exceeding marginal costs, a country’s
contributions to the global public good is expanded, and there are greater prospects for world-
wide public health benefits. For these reasons, US officials could raise these issues at
international negotiations and advocate for higher prices than presently set in high-income ROW
34

countries. A multi-country agreement in this direction would represent a serious effort to
support improved world health.
Economic forces also lead the largest countries to assume a more-than-proportional share
of the burden needed to produce a communal good. Consistent with that judgment is that US
prices of branded innovative pharmaceuticals are much higher than those found elsewhere,
which thereby provides greater support for global pharmaceutical R&D. That conclusion is
reached both in country aggregates and by per capita expenditures.
A direct implication of our finding of low ROW support per capita for this global public
good is that “free riding” exists where countries pay less than their implicit valuation of any new
medications discovered. But the observed free riding is not complete. We also find that leading
ROW countries contribute a significant share of the total funding. On this account, we can reject
the frequent assertion that all ROW countries pay only marginal costs and thereby provide
minimal support for the public good.
That buyers are willing to pay more for comparable pharmaceuticals in the United
States than elsewhere can be explained by significant structural differences. In earlier research,
we reported that average launch prices of US branded pharmaceuticals lie below $40,000 per
Quality Adjusted Life Year (QALY) gained on average from new pharmaceutical (Frech, Pauly,
Comanor and Martinez 2022).13 That estimate should be contrasted with available evidence on
revealed consumer preferences in the United States for additional QALYs. What studies of
consumer and labor decisions describe is that US public “willingness to pay” amounts for the
prospect of an additional QALY exceeds $200,000 (Viscusi, 2020). The difference between
13 The estimated $40,000 upper limit is inflated for two reasons: First, it is based on list prices, not prices net of
rebates and discounts. The discounts and rebates are large, estimated to average to 33% of list prices (Mulcahy,
et. al. 2020). Second, it is only available temporarily, during the remaining life of the patent.
35

these two broad estimates provides a conservative indication of the median price increase that a
fully-informed US public would willingly bear rather than let an effective drug be unavailable. In
effect, this difference of at least $160,000 per QALY suggests that even the US is on average
underpaying its support of this global public good. (Frech, Pauly, Comanor and Martinez 2022).
If the US contribution is low, the ROW countries’ even lower contribution exacerbates the
problem. This conclusion does not preclude the prospect that some branded drugs are overpriced
in the US, but it suggests that on average the US prices do not fully incentivize valuable R&D
efforts.
To be sure, US prices largely result from negotiations between payers and producers (as
buyers and sellers), and paid for the most part collectively, either though taxation or insurance
premiums. As a result, they ignore the societal distributive effects associated with high
consumer prices paid by uninsured or underinsured patients. For such consumers, policy
measures are needed to offset the effects on low income consumers that may occur. However,
the need for such measures is not a reason to negate the worldwide societal benefits gained from
enhanced pharmaceutical innovation.
That US prices charged for branded, originator drugs are higher than those found in other
ROW countries is undisputable. These higher prices provide the leading source of support for
the global public good depicted here. The connection between these prices and enhanced R&D
efforts is embodied in an industrial structure specifically created by the 1984 Hatch-Waxman
Act, and which has been recognized in judicial decisions (Abbott v Young, 1990).
Because this global public good is likely to be undersupplied on a world-wide basis,
policies that limit the extent of ROW free-riding would move towards a more economically
efficient allocation.
36

REFERENCES
Abbott v Young, 920 F.2d 984; (1990).
Anderson, Richard, “Pharmacy industry get high on fat profits,” BBC (Nov. 6, 2014)
www.bbc.com/news/business-28212223
Antos, Joseph and James C. Capretta, “Prescription Drug Pricing: An Overview of the Legal,
Regulatory and Market Environment,” American Enterprise Institute, Economic Perspectives
(July 2018).
Bergstrom, Theodore, Lawrence Blume and Hal Varian, “On the Private Provision of Public
Goods, Journal of Public Economics 29 (1986): 25-49.
Berndt, Ernst and Murray Aitken, 2011. "Brand Loyalty, Generic Entry and Price Competition in
Pharmaceuticals in the Quarter Century after the 1984 Waxman-Hatch Legislation,"
International Journal of the Economics of Business, 18(2) (Nov. 2011): 177-201.
Bhattacharya, Jayanta, and William B. Vogt. “A Simple Model of Pharmaceutical Price
Dynamics.” The Journal of Law & Economics 46, (2) (October 2003): 599–626.
Biden, Joseph, Labor Day Address, September 5, 2022.
Blumenthal, David, “It’s the Monopolies, Stupid” Commonwealth Fund Blog, (May 24,
2018).he Monopolies, Stupid!” Commonwealth
Fundhttps://www.commonwealthfund.org/blog/2018/its-monopolies-stupi
Buxbaum, Jason D., Michael E. Chernew, A. Mark Fendrick, and David M. Cutler,
“Contributions of Public Health, Pharmaceuticals, and other Medical Care to US Life
Expectancy Changes 1990-2015,” Health Affairs, 39(9) (2020): 1546–1556.
Caves, Richard D., Michael D. Whinston, Mark A. Hurwitz, Ariel Pakes and Peter Temin,
“Patent Expiration, Entry, and Competition in the U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics, Vol. 1991 (1991): 1-66.
Chen, Angela, Mark V. Pauly, William S. Comanor and H.E. Frech, III, “The Global
Distribution of New Drug R&D Costs: Does the Rest of the World Free Ride,” (forthcoming).
Civan, Abdulkadir and Michael T. Maloney, “The Effect of Price on Pharmaceutical R&D,” B.E.
Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 9(1) (2009): Article 15.
Comanor, William S., “Research and Technical Change in the Pharmaceutical Industry,” Review
of Economics and Statistics, 47, (May 1965) 182-190.
37

Comanor, William S., Stuart O. Schweitzer, Jon Riddle and Frederic Schoenberg, “Value Based
Pricing in the US and the UK: Does Centralized Cost Effectiveness Analysis Matter?” Review of
Industrial Organization 52 (June 2018: 589-602.
Cruzet, Nicholas, Janice C. Eberly, Andrea L. Eisfeldt and Dimitris Papaniknoau, “The
Economics of Intangible Capital,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 36(3) (Summer 2022): 29-
52.
Danzon, Patricia M., “Differential Pricing of Pharmaceuticals: Theory, Evidence and emerging
Issues,” PharmacoEconomics (36) (2018):1395-1405.
Danzon, Patricia M., Richard Wang and Liang Wang, “The Impact of Price Regulation on the
Launch Delay of New Drugs – Evidence from Twenty-Five Major Markets in the 1990s,” Health
Economics, 14(3) (2005): 269-292
Danzon, Patricia M., Andrew W. Mulcahy and Adrian K. Towse, “Pharmaceutical Pricing in
Emerging Markets: Effects of Income, Competition and Procurement,” Health Economics 24
(2015): 238–252.
DeAngelis, Catherine D, “Big Pharma Profits and the Public Loses,” Milbank Quarterly 94(1)
(March 2016): 30-33.
DiMasi, Joseph A., “Innovation in the Pharmaceutical Industry: New Estimates of R&D Costs,”
UCLA Seminar on Pharmaceutical Economics and Policy, December 3, 2015.
Egan, Mark and Tomas J. Philipson, “International Health Economics, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Working Paper No. 19280 (August 2013).
Ellison, Glenn and Sara Fisher Ellison, “Strategic Entry Deterrence and the Behavior of
Pharmaceutical Incumbents Prior to Patent Expiration,” NBER Working Paper 13069, April
2007.
Filson, Darren, “A Markov-perfect equilibrium model of the impacts of price controls on the
performance of the pharmaceutical industry,” RAND Journal of Economics 43(1) (Spring 2012):
110-138.
Frank, Richard G. and Kathleen Hannick, “5 things to understand about pharmaceutical R&D,”
USC-Shaefer-Brookings on Health Policy (June 2, 2022), https://www.brookings.edu/blog/usc-
brookings-schaeffer-on-health-policy/2022/06/02/five-things-to-understand-about-
pharmaceutical-rd/
Frech, H. E., III, Mark V. Pauly, William S. Comanor and Joseph R. Martinez, “Costs and
Benefits of Branded Drugs: Insights from Cost-Effectiveness Research,” Journal of Benefit-Cost
Analysis 13(2) (2022): 166–181.
38

Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar and Marcel P. Timmer (2015), "The Next Generation of the
Penn World Table," American Economic Review 105(10) (2015): 3150-3182. Data available for
download at www.ggdc.net/pwt
Giaccotto, Carmelo, Rexford E. Santerre and John A. Vernon, “Drug Prices and Research and
Development Investment Behavior in the Pharmaceutical Industry,” Journal of Law &
Economics 48(1) (April 2005):195-214.
Goldman, Dana and Darius Lakdawalla, “The Global Burden of Medical Innovation,” Brookings
Institution (Jan. 30, 2018).
Grabowski, Henry G., and John M. Vernon. “Brand Loyalty, Entry, and Price Competition in
Pharmaceuticals after the 1984 Drug Act,” Journal of Law & Economics 35(2) (Oct. 1992): 331–
50.
Hemmitt, James K. and Lisa A. Robinson, “The Income Elasticity of the Value per Statistical
Life: Transferring Estimates between High and Low Income Populations,” Journal of Benefit-
Cost Analysis, 8(2) (2011).
Hooper, Charles A. and David Henderson, “Expensive Prescription Drugs Are a Bargain,” Wall
Street Journal (November 14, 2022).
Imbert, Fred. “Trump appeals for lower drug prices: ‘(This is wrong, unfair and together we can
stop it.’” CNBC (February 5 2019), https://www.cnbc.com/2019/02/05/trump-calls-for-lower-
drug-prices-at-the-state-of-the-union.html.
Jones, Charles I., “Taxing Top Incomes in a World of Ideas,” Journal of Political Economy
130(9) (September 2022): 2227-2274.
Kaul, Inge, Isabelle Grunberg and Mark A. Stern Stiglitz, Joseph D. “Defining Global Public
Goods,” in Global Public Goods, ed. by Inge Kaul, Isabelle Grunberg and Mark A. Stern,
Oxford: (1999): 2-19.
Lakdawalla, Darius N., “The Economics of the Pharmaceutical Industry,” Journal of Economic
Literature 56(2) (June 2018): 397–449.
Lakdawalla, Darius N. and Tomas Philipson, “Does Intellectual Property Restrict Output? an
Analysis of Pharmaceutical Markets,” Journal of Law and Economics 55 (1) February 2012, pp.
151-187.
Lichtenberg, Frank R, “Pharmaceutical Knowledge-Capital Accumulation and Longevity,” in
Measuring Capital in the New Economy, ed. by Carol Corrado, John Halitwanger and Dan Sichel
NBER, University of Chicago Press (2005): 237-274.
Lichtenberg, Frank R. “Benefits and Costs of Newer Drugs: An Update,” Managerial and
Decision Economics, 28(4/5) (June – Aug. 2007): 485-490.
39

Mas-Collel, Andre, Michael D. Whinston and Jerry Green, Microeconomic Theory, Oxford
University Press (1995).
Maini, Luca. And Fabio Passamoli, “Reference Pricing as a Deterrent to Entry: Evidence from
the European Pharmaceutical Market,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 15(2)
(2023): 345-383.
Mulcahy, Andrew W., Christopher Whaley, Mahlet G. Tebeka, Daniel Schwam, Nathaniel
Edenfield and Alejandro U. Becerra-Ornelas, International Prescription Drug Price
Comparisons: Current Empirical Estimates and Comparisons with Previous Studies, RAND
Research Report (2021).
Neumann, Peter, Joshua T. Cohen, Daniel A. Ollendorf, The Right Price, Oxford University
Press, 2021.
Olson, Mancur, The Logic of Collective Action, Harvard University Press, 1965, 1971.
Olson, Mancur Jr. and Richard Zeckhauser, An Economic Theory of Alliances, Rand Corp.,
memorandum RM-4297-ISA (Oct. 1966a).
Olson, Mancur Jr. and Richard Zeckhauser, “An Economic Theory of Alliances,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 48(3) (Aug., 1966b): 266-279.
Omeokwe, Amara and Siobhan Hughes, “What’s in the Democrats Bill on Climate, Health and
Tax Policy,” Wall Street Journal (Aug. 12, 2022).
Pecorino, Paul
, “Should the US allow prescription drug reimports from Canada?J”o urnal of
HePahlathm E, Ccoanthoemriinces, K i2m1 L(4e), M(2a0s0h2a )D: 6ra9v9e–s 7a0n8d. Enrique Seoane-Vazquez, “ Assessment of FDA-
Approved Drugs Not Recommended for Use or Reimbursement in Other Countries, 2017-2020 “
JAMAInternal Medicine: HEALTH CARE POLICY AND LAW (February 13, 2023),
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/fullarticle/2801020?guestAccessKey=04
05a5f1-3465-4d9b-bf78-
20791947baf0&utm_source=silverchair&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=article_alert-
jamainternalmedicine&utm_content=olf&utm_term=021323.
Philipson, Tomas and Anaupam B. Jena, “Who Benefits from New Medical Technologies?
Estimates of Consumer and Producer Surpluses for HIV/AIDS Drugs,” Forum for Health
Economics & Policy, 9(3) (2006): 1-33.
Rice, Thomas, Health Insurance Systems: An International Comparison, Academic Press, 2021.
Salant, Steve, “Monopoly Pricing in Domestic and Foreign Markets When Manufacturer Raises
the Cost of Consumer Arbitrage,” (unpublished) (Oct. 22, 2022).
40

Samuelson, Paul A., “The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 36(4) (Nov., 1954): 387-389.
Samuelson, Paul A., “Diagrammatic Exposition of a Theory of Public Expenditure,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 37(4) (Nov., 1955): pp. 350-356.
Sandler, Todd and Jon Cauley, “On the Economic Theory of Alliances,” Journal of Conflict
Resolution, 75(19) (June, 1975): 330-348.
Sandler, Todd and Keith Hartley, “Economics of Alliances: Lessons for Collective Action,”
Journal of Economic Literature 39(3) (Sept. 2001):551-559.
Scherer, F.M., “The Link between Gross Profitability and Pharmaceutical R&D Spending,”
Health Affairs, 20(5) (September 2001): 216-220.
Schweitzer, Stuart O. and William S. Comanor, “Prices of Pharmaceuticals In
Poor Countries Are Much Lower Than In Wealthy Countries,” Health Affairs 30(8)
(August 2011): 1553–1561.
Shrestha, Ratna K. and James P. Hughes, “Contributions to International Public Goods and the
Notion of Country Size,” FinanceArchive/Public Finance Analysis 59(4) (2002/2003): 551-559.
Stiglitz, Joseph D. “Knowledge as a Global Pubic Good,” in Global Public Goods, ed. by Inge
Kaul, Isabelle Grunberg and Mark A. Stern, Oxford: (1999): 308-325.
U.S. Congressional Budget Office, Letter to Honorable Frank Pallone Jr. Chairman Committee
on Energy and Commerce U.S. House of Representatives Washington, DC 20515
Re: Effects of Drug Price Negotiation Stemming From Title 1 of H.R. 3, the Lower Drug Costs
Now Act of 2019, on Spending and Revenues Related to Part D of Medicare (Oct. 11, 2019).
US Council of Economic Advisors, Reforming Biopharmaceutical Pricing at Home and Abroad
(Feb. 2018).
----------, Funding the Global Benefits of Biopharmaceutical Innovation (Feb. 2020).
Viscusi, W. Kip and Clayton J. Masterman, “Income Elasticities and Global Values of a
Statistical Life,” Journal of Benefit Cost Analysis 8(2) (2017): 226-250.
Viscusi, W. Kip, Pricing Lives: Guideposts for a Safer Society, Princeton University Press, 2018.
41

Figure 1, Reaction Functions and Nash Equilibrium
42

Figure 2, High Demander, Large Contribution
43

Figure 3, Medium Demander, Positive Contribution
44

Figure 4, Low Demander, Zero Contribution
45

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics (n = 33)
Mean SD Min Median Max
Contribution (MC = 24%),
12.1 50.1 -2.4 1.0 289.2
$ Billions
Contribution (MC = 14.2%),
14.9 56.6 0.0 1.7 326.4
$ Billions
Contribution per Capita (MC =24%), $ 130.6 158.8 -31.0 106.6 884.0
Contribution per Capita (MC = 14.2%), $ 192.1 176.8 0.0 171.3 998.0
GDP, $ trillions 1.8 3.6 0.0 0.6 20.4
Population (millions) 39.1 62.5 0.6 10.7 327.1
GDP per Capita, $ thousands 45.9 18.7 19.6 41.2 111.7
Brand-Name Price Index 41.8 14.2 14.2 42.4 100.0
46

Table 2: Correlations (n = 33)
Brand-
Contribution, Contribution, GDP per Name
MC=24% MC=14.2% Cont per cap, Cont per cap, GDP ($ Population capita ($ Price
($ Billions) ($ Billions) MC=24% ($) MC=14.2% ($) trillions) (millions) thousands) Index
Contribution
(MC = 24%) 1 1 0.881 0.850 0.964 0.867 0.156 0.770
Contribution
(MC = 14.2%) 1 1 0.883 0.853 0.970 0.876 0.152 0.771
Cont per Capita
(MC = 24%) 0.881 0.883 1 0.994 0.850 0.728 0.392 0.940
Cont per Capita
(MC = 14.2%) 0.850 0.853 0.994 1 0.818 0.688 0.437 0.920
GDP 0.964 0.970 0.850 0.818 1 0.958 0.098 0.753
Population 0.867 0.876 0.728 0.688 0.958 1 -0.033 0.654
GDP per Capita 0.156 0.152 0.392 0.437 0.098 -0.033 1 0.352
Brand-Name
Price Index 0.770 0.771 0.940 0.920 0.753 0.654 0.352 1
47

Table 3: Calculated Contributions and other Data
Brand-
Contribution, Contribution, Cont per cap, Cont per cap, GDP Population GDP per Name
Country MC=24% MC=14.2% MC=24% MC=14.2% capita Price
($ Billions) ($ Billions) ($) ($) ($ trillions) (millions) ($ thousands) Index
Australia 2.66 4.52 106.77 181.5 1.28 24.9 51.56 38.00
Austria 1.92 2.63 216.26 295.47 0.49 8.89 55.40 50.75
Belgium 2.2 3.18 191.62 276.66 0.58 11.48 50.13 46.08
Canada 7.76 10.59 209.24 285.69 1.82 37.07 48.97 50.82
Chile 0.12 0.25 6.19 13.43 0.44 18.73 23.68 32.39
Czechia 0.86 1.31 80.25 122.51 0.42 10.67 39.82 42.60
Estonia -0.01 0.05 -10.64 36.91 0.05 1.32 35.56 21.81
Finland 0.97 1.37 174.82 247.6 0.26 5.52 46.77 47.54
France 9.62 14.64 143.25 217.89 2.97 67.19 44.14 42.80
Germany 16.46 21.96 198.06 264.17 4.28 83.12 51.43 53.35
Greece -0.33 0.67 -30.99 63.8 0.3 10.52 28.30 20.80
Hungary 0.74 1.13 75.72 116.47 0.31 9.71 31.78 42.20
Ireland 0.97 1.33 201.26 276.93 0.44 4.82 90.30 50.06
Italy 11.82 16.77 194.91 276.58 2.5 60.63 41.22 47.38
Japan 28.87 40.4 226.99 317.57 4.98 127.2 39.18 48.55
Latvia 0.04 0.11 23.3 56.97 0.06 1.93 30.29 30.78
Lithuania 0.04 0.17 14.21 60.14 0.1 2.8 35.04 27.03
Luxembourg 0.05 0.1 83.94 171.28 0.07 0.6 111.70 33.42
Mexico 1.01 1.61 8.03 12.76 2.47 126.19 19.58 40.63
Netherlands 1.03 1.68 60.26 98.19 0.94 17.06 55.09 39.57
New Zealand 0.34 0.51 72.5 108.31 0.2 4.74 41.28 43.83
Norway 0.86 1.31 160.53 246.04 0.34 5.34 64.11 42.39
Poland 1.51 2.34 39.82 61.61 1.19 37.92 31.50 41.91
Portugal 1.09 1.76 106.62 172 0.34 10.26 33.30 39.98
Rep. of Korea 0.99 3.42 19.41 66.82 2.1 51.17 41.08 28.01
Slovakia 0.3 0.56 54.23 103.36 0.17 5.45 31.67 34.81
Slovenia 0.19 0.33 92.8 160.81 0.08 2.08 38.51 37.37
Spain 9.49 13.03 203.17 279.13 1.9 46.69 40.67 50.21
Sweden 1.56 2.29 156.67 230.02 0.55 9.97 55.39 44.93
Switzerland 2.25 3.02 263.89 354.11 0.61 8.53 71.62 52.66
Turkey -2.37 0 -28.76 0 2.21 82.34 26.86 14.20
United Kingdom 7.37 11.23 109.83 167.31 3.08 67.14 45.88 42.72
United States 289.16 326.44 884.04 998.01 20.37 327.1 62.27 100.00
Total 399.55 490.72
World without
US 110.39 164.28
48