NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
MISPERCEPTIONS AND DEMAND FOR DEMOCRACY UNDER AUTHORITARIANISM
Daron Acemoglu
Cevat Giray Aksoy
Ceren Baysan
Carlos Molina
Gamze Zeki
Working Paper 33018
http://www.nber.org/papers/w33018
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2024
We are deeply grateful to Evrim Bal, Görkem Başaran, Özer Dondurmacıoğlu, Oltaç Ünsal, the
volunteers, and the Turkish-American Gezi Platform for their invaluable contributions; this
project would not have been possible without their support. The project received funding from the
Bradley and Hewlett Foundation, the Centre for Governance and Society at King’s College
London, and the Institute for Humane Studies (IHS017372). It was approved by the Bahçeşehir
University Institutional Review Board (Protocol ID: E-20021704-604.02.02-51326) and the MIT
Institutional Review Board (Protocol ID: E-4602) and registered with the AEA RCT registry
(AEARCTR-0011480). The views presented are solely those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Daron Acemoglu, Cevat Giray Aksoy, Ceren Baysan, Carlos Molina, and Gamze Zeki.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Misperceptions and Demand for Democracy under Authoritarianism
Daron Acemoglu, Cevat Giray Aksoy, Ceren Baysan, Carlos Molina, and Gamze Zeki
NBER Working Paper No. 33018
October 2024
JEL No. P16
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates whether enduring authoritarian regimes are in part rooted in the
population’s misperceptions about their social and economic costs—as opposed to a general
preference for authoritarianism. We explore this question using online and field experiments in the
context of Türkiye’s May 2023 presidential and parliamentary elections. We confirm that voters,
especially those supporting the incumbent authoritarian government systematically underestimate
the extent to which democracy and media freedom have been eroded in Türkiye and their usefulness
in dealing with natural disasters and corruption (two salient issues in Türkiye). We find that
providing (accurate) information about the state and implications of democracy and media freedom
have significant effects on beliefs and increase the likelihood of voting for the opposition by about
3.7 percentage points (6.2 percent) in the online experiment. In the field experiment, we estimate
similarly-sized impacts on the ballot-box level vote share—with the information treatment leading
to a 2.4 percentage point (4.4 percent) increase in the opposition’s vote share. Interestingly, both in
the field and online, the results are driven not by further mobilizing opposition supporters, but by
influencing those likely to vote for the governing coalition and those holding more misperceived
beliefs about democracy and media freedom in Türkiye. The evidence suggests that at least part of
the support for authoritarian regimes may be coming from misperceptions about their institutions
and policies, and may be more malleable than typically presumed.
Daron Acemoglu Carlos Molina
Department of Economics, E52-446 University of South Carolina
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 1014 Greene St
77 Massachusetts Avenue Columbia, SC 29033
Cambridge, MA 02139 carlosmolinaguerra@gmail.com
and NBER
daron@mit.edu Gamze Zeki
Stockholm University
Cevat Giray Aksoy gamze.zeki@su.se
King's College London
cevat.aksoy@kcl.ac.uk
Ceren Baysan
University of Toronto
ceren.baysan@utoronto.ca

1 Introduction
A view pithily summarized by the French conservative philosopher Joseph de Maistre’s 1857
statement, “Toute nation a le gouvernement qu’elle mérite” [Nations get the government
they deserve], explains enduring authoritarian governments in many countries around the
world by lack of true demand for democracy within their populations. This perspective
is often invoked in explaining why democracy will not take root in China or Russia (e.g.,
Huntington [1997], Gessen [2017], Mitter and Johnson [2021]). Yet, many authoritarian
regimes also control the media, repress dissent and use rigged elections and propaganda in
order to convince their populations that they are more democratic than they truly are (as
in Russia, Hungary or India today) or often argue that democracy would bring gridlock or
even chaos (as in China or Türkiye). This raises the possibility that the population may
hold misperceived beliefs about the state and the utility of democracy in their country.
We investigate these issues in the context of Türkiye’s May 2023 parliamentary and (two
rounds of) presidential elections, which The Economist Magazine described as the “most
important election of 2023” and crucial for “the future of democracy.”1 The election came
after more than 20 years of rule by Recep Tayyip Erdog̃an and his AKP (Justice and Devel-
opment) party, during which time, according to V-DEM data, the country experienced the
second largest deterioration in democratic institutions worldwide, only after Nicaragua (e.g.,
Freedom House [2024]). Consistent with the possibility that there may be systematic misper-
ceptions in the population, our baseline surveys reveal that Turkish voters, especially those
supporting the governing coalition, hold more optimistic views about how democracy and
media freedom/independence in the country have evolved since Erdog̃an came to power in
2003andmorepessimisticbeliefsaboutwhetherdemocracycanbemoresuccessfulindealing
with natural disasters and whether media freedom will be good for controlling corruption.2
We use an online experiment and a large-scale field experiment, involving 880,000 voters.
In both, we provide (accurate) information on the state and implications of democracy and
media freedom. This information reflects the actual evolution of Turkish institutions from V-
DEM data and findings in the literature on the relationship between democracy and natural
disasters on the one hand (e.g., Besley and Burgess [2002], Cao [2024], Kahn [2005]) and
media freedom and corruption on the other (e.g., Besley and Burgess [2002], Brunetti and
Weder [2003], Ferraz and Finan [2008], Larreguy et al. [2020]). These two issues were top
of mind for Turkish voters due to the massive February 2023 earthquake, which led to the
deathsofmorethan50,000andthedisplacementofmorethanonemillionpeople. Theeffects
1See here and here [accessed 31/8/2024]
2Throughout, we use media freedom and media independence interchangeably.
1

of the earthquake were greatly exacerbated because of unsafe building practices, which were
in turn enabled by local and national corruption.
Online, we additionally provided a placebo treatment, designed as in Acemoglu et al.
[2020], that contained encouragement but no actual information as a way of controlling
for experimenter demand effects. We then investigated the effects of the information and
placebo treatments on self-reported individual beliefs and voting intentions. For ease of
exposition, for our main results in the online experiment, we bundle the democracy and
media treatments together.
Importantly, in our field experiment, we adopted a non-partisan approach, and we ini-
tially contacted all major parties and invited them to partner with us in a study about
perceptions of democracy and media independence. We emphasized that our objective was
to understand how each party defines and approaches democracy. Even though the two lead-
ing parties from the governing coalitions did not accept to take part in our study, we tried to
focus our treatments on factual information as much as possible. Specifically, we provided
two versions of our informational treatment by using door-to-door canvassing randomized
at the level of neighborhoods and the first of these, our high-credibility treatment, is purely
factual and based on consensus views in current research.3 We then used administrative
electoral data across ballot boxes to track actual voting outcomes. We also conducted addi-
tional cross-randomizations in order to study how the aﬀiliation of canvassers affected the
credibility of the informational treatments.
The key questions of interest in our experiments concern whether the information we
provide will be disregarded by Turkish voters—which would be evidence that they do not
care much about democratic institutions or have been firmly convinced by propaganda that
either Turkish institutions are suﬀiciently democratic and/or there is not much to gain
from greater democracy or media freedom. Alternatively, if participants’ beliefs and voting
intentions (in the online experiment) and voters’ actual choices (in the field experiment)
respond to our informational treatments, this would be evidence in favor of the hypothesis
that various types of misperceptions and inaccurate information are influencing the demand
for democracy and possible support for authoritarian leaders.
Our results in the two experiments consistently support the latter hypothesis and show
significant effects from the informational treatments. Online, we find that the bundled infor-
mational treatment increases the subjects’ beliefs in the value of the institutions (democracy
or free media) and aligns their perceptions of the evolution of institutions with reality. It
3Thesecond,whichwecallthebasicinformationaltreatment,includesmorepartisanlanguage. However,
note that this is a version of what our partners were planning to implement without our involvement, and
thus our study did not add further partisan language or canvassing strategies. We evaluate the effects of
both the high-credibility and the basic informational treatments.
2

also increases their likelihood of voting for the opposition by about 3.7 percentage points
(equivalent to a 6.2 percent increase relative to the mean). In contrast, the effects of the
placebo treatment are much smaller (about 0.5 percentage points) and far from statistical
significance.
In the field experiment, the bundled treatment—combining the high-credibility and basic
informational treatments—led to a 2.4 percentage point increase in the opposition’s vote
share (corresponding to a 4.4 percent rise relative to the mean) in the first round of the
presidential election and similar effects in the parliamentary elections and in the second
round presidential election.
Anaturalconjectureisthatinformationaltreatmentswouldhavelittleeffectontheviews
and voting intentions of those who are supporting the government and/or maintain that the
state of democracy is healthy in Türkiye; they may instead impact averages by mobilizing
and further motivating those already sympathetic to the opposition. Interestingly, we find
exactly the opposite pattern: Online and in the field, there are no turnout effects and our
estimates are larger for those who are supportive of the government and who have greater
misperceptions about the state and/or the utility of democracy and free media. These
results thus suggest that even simple informational treatments have the potential to change
misperceptions about democracy and its relevance to people’s lives. Consistent with this
interpretation, we also find that information provided by non-aﬀiliated canvassers, rather
than aﬀiliates of the two main opposition parties, appear more credible, which supports the
notion that those leaning towards the incumbent coalition can respond to new and relevant
information, provided that they view it as credible.
Our study relates to three separate literatures. First, we build on research exploring
the determinants of voters’ preferences for democratic institutions (e.g., Besley and Persson
[2019], Dahlum et al. [2024], Finkel et al. [2024], Fuchs-Schundeln and Schundeln[2015], Gra-
ham and Svolik [2020], Persson and Tabellini [2009], Svolik [2023]). Our paper contributes
to this literature by first documenting systematic misperceptions about the state and value
of democratic institutions and free media, and then showing that simple information cam-
paigns can have significant effects by correcting these misconceptions. Our result that voter
misperceptions and their assessment of the value of democracy and media freedom is at least
partly malleable and can be impacted by accurate information has no equivalent in this, or
any other, literature, to the best of our knowledge. Combined with the finding that suc-
cessful performance by democratic governments builds support for democracy in (Acemoglu
et al. [2024]), our findings additionally suggest that misperceptions about democracy can be-
come partly self-fulfilling as long-ruling authoritarian regimes cement misperceptions which
then increase their support and reduce the demand for democracy and media freedom. But
3

our results also show that this cycle can be broken by accurate and impartially-presented
information.
Second, our paper is related to the literature on the impact of corruption scandals on
voter preferences (e.g., Arias et al. [2022], Chong et al. [2015], Enríquez et al. [2024], Ferraz
and Finan [2008], Larreguy et al. [2020], Rivera et al. [2024]). For example, Rivera et al.
[2024] analyze over 170 high-profile corruption scandals involving leading politicians across
17 Latin American countries, complemented by a field experiment in Mexico. Relative
to this literature, our study focuses on misperceptions about democracy and free media
and explores whether accurate and relevant information can rebuild support for more pro-
democracy candidates in elections, even in the shadow of intensifying authoritarianism. We
also leverage our online experiment and our work in the field combined with high-quality
administrative data both to establish these results and to explore the mechanisms via which
they transpire; this, too, has no equivalent in this literature, to the best of our knowledge.
Third,ourstudyrelatestotheliteratureonthepoliticaleconomyofpersuasion,especially
in the context of weak democracies or authoritarian regimes (Adena et al. [2015], Enikolopov
et al. [2011, 2023], Knight and Tribin [2022], Peisakhin and Rozenas [2018]). The closely
related study by Baysan [2022] also uses administrative data to evaluate the impact of
a randomized door-to-door information campaign on voter behavior in the 2017 Turkish
constitutional referendum (which proposed a transition to a presidential system and a de
facto relaxation of President Erdog̃an’s term limits). She finds that this information had a
polarizing effect. A few other studies also find that information provided by the traditional
mediacanincreasevoterpolarization(Adenaetal.[2015],Enikolopovetal.[2023],Peisakhin
and Rozenas [2018]). Additionally, Cruz et al. [2024] find that door-to-door campaigns with
policy information reduced self-reported support for a populist leader in the Philippines,
and Ahmed et al. [2023] examine the effects of neutral information and a get-out-the-vote
campaign during the 2018 Bangladeshi general election and find that these interventions
increased turnout in government strongholds, while decreasing it in areas leaning towards
the opposition, thus further raising the electoral advantage of the incumbent government.
Afrouzi et al. [2024] estimate that leaders can influence individuals with their messages in
the US context, while Imtiaz et al. [2024] explore the effects of information on air quality
provided by the government and by private citizens groups on their willingness to pay for
air quality in Lahore, Pakistan. Our study is distinguished relative to this literature both by
its focus on the support for democracy versus authoritarianism and because it combines this
with high-quality administrative data to evaluate experimental effects. It also pinpoints how
relativelysimple, accurateinformationcanpartiallycorrectmisperceptionsaboutdemocracy
and how this can be effective among voters that hold more misperceived beliefs or among
4

those that support the government. We suspect that the exact context and presentation
of the information matters for whether it will have polarizing effects (see also Enikolopov
et al. [2023] and Peisakhin and Rozenas [2018]). The fact that our treatments were based
on factual and research-based information and were, to the extent possible, presented in
a non–partisan manner was important in communicating with government supporters and
withpeoplewithdifferentbaselinebeliefs. Inthislight, itmaybeconjecturedthattheearlier
results in Baysan [2022] were perceived differently by voters, both because the population
may have been more polarized in the context of the 2017 referendum, especially on the
question of desirability of a strong executive, and also because the informational treatments,
which included a call to oppose the constitutional change, may have been interpreted as
more directly critical of President Erdog̃an and his regime.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We start in the next section with some
basic context on the evolution of Turkish institutions over the last two decades and the
2023 election. Section 3 describes our experiments. Section 4 discusses the results from our
online experiment, while Section 5 turns to our main results, which are from the large-scale
field experiment. Section 6 discusses the potential mechanisms for our main findings, while
Section 7 concludes. The Appendix presents additional data descriptions and robustness
checks. The Online Supplementary Material, available here, contains detailed information
about the online and field experiments, including our survey instrument and figures.
2 Background
In this section, we provide a brief summary of the Turkish context before the 2023 elections.
2.1 Institutional and Social Changes in Türkiye under AKP Rule
Since coming to power in 2002, the AKP, and its founding leader Recep Tayyip Erdog̃an
who became prime minister in 2003, have emerged as the dominant force in Turkish politics,
gaining more votes than any other party in all parliamentary elections over the last 22 years.
The AKP initially supported economic and political reforms that had started before its
accession to power and enthusiastically worked to curb the influence of the secular Turkish
military. It even pursued various reforms expanding religious and minority rights, anti-
corruption efforts, and membership of the European Union. By the mid-2000s, however, the
AKP’s enthusiasm for economic opening and political reform waned (Acemoglu and Üçer
[2019]). This coincided both with the party gaining supremacy over the center-right, with
the collapse of all other center-right parties in Türkiye, and its survival from an attempt
5

by the military and secular elements of the bureaucracy to close it down and imprison its
leaders, including Erdog̃an. Around this time, Erdog̃an intensified his control over the party
and adopted a more authoritarian agenda, launching a gradually intensifying crackdown on
the opposition and independent media.
Figure 1 illustrates these trends using democracy scores from the V-DEM dataset. In
Panel A, we show the evolution of the overall democracy index, ranging from 0 to 100, with
higher values indicating more democratic institutions. A trend towards higher democracy
scores predates AKP’s accession to power, but this is reversed sometime in the mid-2000s,
and democracy in Türkiye starts a precipitous decline thereafter. Panel B shows that the
same pattern can be seen in all subcomponents of the democracy score, with the sharpest
fall being in the liberal and the deliberative aspects, which partly reflects the erosion of the
freedom of expression, media freedom and dissent in Türkiye.
2.2 The 2023 Elections
The 2023 parliamentary and presidential elections were seen as historic in Türkiye, in part
because discontent with AKP rule in some segments of the population was intensifying and
even some of Erdog̃an’s erstwhile allies had now turned against him. The economic situation
was indeed dire, with oﬀicial inflation exceeding 70% (and the unoﬀicial rate perhaps being
higher), in part because of unorthodox economic policies centered on low interest rates
favored and imposed on the central bank by President Erdog̃an himself. Concurrently, the
Turkish lira plummeted, losing 80% of its value between 2018 and 2023.4 Low interest
rates and government spending initially stimulated the economy, but there were also signs
that economic growth was flailing and the oﬀicial unemployment rate reached about 10% in
January, 2023, even though many working-age Turks had already withdrawn from the labor
market.5
In the midst of intensifying poverty and economic hardship, the south of the country
suffered a massive (7.8 magnitude) earthquake in February 2023, killing more than 50,000
people and displacing more than a million. Although the earthquake itself was one of the
largestseenintheregion,withseveralpowerfulanddisruptiveaftershocks,theexpertopinion
blamed the death toll and the destruction on tens of thousands of buildings that did not
follow the building code, even in high earthquake-risk areas. It was also recognized that this
was a result of endemic local and national corruption, as well as a “building code violation
amnesty” which was promulgated by President Erdog̃an himself, allowing unsafe buildings
to remain in place. Even before the earthquake AKP censorship efforts had expanded, with
4CNBC article on Turkish Lira’s record low against the dollar [accessed 31/8/2024]
5Unemployment rate data from the World Bank [accessed 31/8/2024]
6

a 2022 law enabling the government to shut down all kinds of media outlets. The law was
used to stop social media communications after the earthquake.
In the midst of deepening economic problems, intensifying reactions against corrupt
practices of the governing party, growing unpopularity of Erdog̃an among some segments of
the Turkish population, and the tragedy of the earthquake, many in civil society and within
the opposition started viewing the 2023 election as an opportunity to unseat Erdog̃an. This
was one of the factors leading to the formation of a broad coalition of opposition parties
against the government. Consequently, the 2023 elections was fought between three electoral
blocs:
1. The People’s Alliance: This alliance comprised the ruling AKP and its partner,
the far right the Nationalist Movement Party (MHP). The alliance, which initially
formed in 2018, also included support from smaller right-wing and religious parties,
such as the Great Unity Party (BBP), the Islamist New Welfare Party (YRP) and
the Kurdish Islamist Free Cause Party (HÜDA-PAR). The presidential candidate of
the People’s Alliance was President Erdog̃an. The MHP contested the parliamentary
elections independently, but supported Erdog̃an in the presidential race.
2. The Nation Alliance: This alliance was led by the main opposition, center-left
Republican People’s Party (CHP), which had been the main opposition party for most
of the AKP period and the ruler of Türkiye during the early Republican years. The
alliance included the nationalist/center-right Good (İYİ) Party, which had split off
fromthefar-rightMHP,theIslamistFelicityParty(SP),andthecentre-rightDemocrat
Party (DP), and two recent parties established by former AKP leaders, the Democracy
and Progress Party (DEVA) and the Future Party (GP). The presidential candidate
of the Nation Alliance was Kemal Kılıçdarog̃lu.
3. The Labor and Freedom Alliance: This alliance was made up of the Kurdish
People’s Democratic Party (HDP) and various other Kurdish and left-wing parties. As
the election approached and with the likelihood of being disbanded by the authorities,
the HDP decided to participate in the elections under the umbrella of the Green Left
Party, which had been ruled eligible by the Supreme Election Council (YSK). This
alliance was not the main contender for the presidency and declared their support for
the Nation Alliance candidate Kılıçdarog̃lu before the election.
Two other candidates were Muharrem İnce, a former leading figure in the CHP and
then the leader of the Homeland Party, who withdrew from the race three days prior to
7

the election, and Sinan Og̃an, from the anti-immigration, nationalist Ancestral Alliance.
Parliamentary elections and the first-round of the presidential elections were on May 14.
Despite some pre-election polls favoring the opposition, the People’s Alliance gained a
majority in parliament with 49.5% of the vote and 323 of the 600 seats, while the Nation
Alliance got 212 seats with 35% of the vote. President Erdog̃an came very close to securing
a majority in the first-round of the presidential election, with 49.5% of the vote, against
Kılıçdarog̃lu’s vote share of 44.9%. Because no candidate received more than 50% of the
vote, there was a second-round presidential election in two weeks time, which President
Erdog̃an won handily, with 52.5% of the vote.
3 Experimental Design and Data
Our study is centered on informational treatments providing accurate information on the
state and implications of democracy and media freedom, and were carried out online and
in the field during April-May 2023. In this section, we describe the design of the two
experiments. Appendix Table A-1 provides definitions for all the variables used in the two
experiments.
3.1 Online Experiment
Recruitment and Sample The design of the online experiment is outlined in Appendix
Figure A-1. Between April 11 and May 27, 2023, we invited Turkish adults to participate in
an online study about Turkish institutions via Facebook ads. A total of 19,151 individuals
clicked on the ads and were redirected to the survey landing page, where they were offered
a consent form. Of these, 8,429 proceeded to start the survey. Participants were offered a
chance to earn 2,000 Turkish Liras (equivalent to 100 USD at the time) upon completing
the survey.
The survey comprised three parts: baseline questions, an (informational) intervention,
and endline questions. The baseline questions gathered information on socio-demographic
characteristics, political and social views and baseline perceptions of Turkish institutions.6
Participants who completed the baseline survey much faster or slower than the rest (in
particular, those three standard deviations above or below the median) were excluded from
the sample. A total of 5,161 respondents completed the baseline survey and were then
randomly assigned to two treatment groups, two placebo groups, and a control group, which
we describe in greater detail below. Following the informational treatment, participants
6The English version of the survey and additional details are available here.
8

completed the endline survey, comprising the outcomes of interest as well as final questions
on perceptions of institutions and views towards political parties, as well as questions on
voting intentions. In total, 4,405 participants completed the endline survey, making up our
sample for analysis. Appendix Figure A-2 shows that there is no evidence of differential
attrition in our online experiment.
Informational Treatments As explained above, the main question of interest is whether
high-credibility, accurate information can alter misperceived beliefs about the state and
substantive implications of institutions and, in this way, strengthen support for democratic
institutions in environments where the population has become less positive about democracy
under an authoritarian government. Given the salient issues in Türkiye, we focused on two
dimensions of national institutions, democracy and media, and their effects on two metrics
for success, dealing with natural disasters and controlling corruption. These institutional
features and metrics were validated in focus groups, qualitative fieldwork, and online exper-
imental pilots, where we found that they were easily understandable to and resonated with
Turkish voters (and did so more than other metrics, such as GDP growth rates, inflation
and rule of law related outcomes). It was also important for our purposes that we have high-
credibility evidence on the relationship between the chosen dimension of institutions and the
relevant metric, and in this case, we drew on evidence from Besley and Burgess [2002], Cao
[2024], Kahn [2005] and on the relationships between institutional quality and mitigating
the impact of natural disasters and from Besley and Burgess [2002], Brunetti and Weder
[2003], Ferraz and Finan [2008], Larreguy et al. [2020] on the relationship between media
independence and corruption. Based on this evidence, our two informational treatments
were:
• Media informational treatment: “According to research, as media independence
in a country worsens, corruption increases. Also, according to research, oﬀicial data
shows that media independence has worsened and corruption has increased in Türkiye
in the last 30 years.”
• Democracyinformationaltreatment: “Accordingtoresearch,asdemocracystrength-
ensinacountry, thenumberofbuildingsdamagedbynaturaldisastersandthenumber
of lives lost will decrease. Also, according to research, oﬀicial data shows that democ-
racy has worsened in Türkiye in the last 30 years.”
Participants in the treatment groups could click a button to view supplementary sup-
porting evidence showing the evolution of the relevant institution (media or democracy) over
9

the years 1990, 2000, 2010, and 2022. We also presented the evolution of one of our outcome
metrics, corruption, over the same years in Türkiye, but could not do so for the relevant
outcome in the democracy informational treatment, since we do not have time-series data
on the effects of natural disasters.7 In our experiments, 42.8% of the treated sample opted
to click the button and view this supplementary information.
In addition to the two informational treatments, we had a control group which did
not receive any informational treatment, and two placebo groups, which received placebo
treatments. Specifically, this approach is motivated by possible “experimenter demand ef-
fects” whereby subjects may feel encouraged to provide answers that align with what they
think the experimenters would like to hear. In the case of our media and democracy in-
formational treatments, the concern is that they may be responding not to the information
in the treatments, but to their own perception that we would like them to say that media
freedom and democracy have become worse in Türkiye. To deal with this issue, we follow
Acemoglu et al. [2020] and construct two placebo treatments that do not contain any actual
information and instead containthe views of the experimentersas subjectiveopinions. These
placebo treatments should then create the same experimenter demand effects, but no true
information effects. If so, whether they are significant or not will provide evidence on the
extent of experimenter demand effects and the difference between the informational and the
placebo treatments can be used to net out such demand effects. In our study, these were
worded as:
• Media placebo treatment: “We talked to voters in Türkiye recently and a few
people said: Although I am not sure, I think that, as media independence in a country
worsens, corruption increases. Also, some people think that media independence has
worsened and corruption has increased in Türkiye in the last 30 years.”
• Democracy placebo treatment: “We talked to voters in Türkiye recently and a
few people said: Although I am not sure, I think that, as democracy strengthens, the
number of buildings damaged by natural disasters and the number of lives lost will
decrease. Also, some people think that democracy has worsened in Türkiye in the last
30 years.”
After the treatments, all participants, including those in the control group, were invited
to continue with the survey and complete the endline questions.
Our design also included variations in how the information was presented, with cross-
randomization between formulations that differed on whether they mentioned media inde-
pendence or democracy improvements leading to better outcomes or deteriorations leading
7Additional details are available here.
10

to worse outcomes. At the end, we do not find major differences between these different
framings for our main outcomes of interest, motivating us to describe the details and the
results from different cross-randomizations only in the Appendix (see Appendix Table A-2).
Outcome Variables We collected our main outcome variables for our online experiment
in the baseline and endline surveys. These are:
(1) beliefs about the state of institutions (in particular, individual perceptions on changes
in democracy or media freedom since 2000) and the effectiveness of these institutions (the
impact of freedom of media on the control of corruption and the impact of democracy on
effective responses to natural disasters). Specifically, we constructed two key perception
variables. The first, which we call Valuation of Institutions, measures the extent to which
individuals believe that democratic institutions are important for achieving better outcomes.
This variable is constructed by averaging two seven-point scales, assessing the respondents’
level of agreement with the following statements: “Increasing media independence in a coun-
try will reduce corruption in the future” and “Strengthening democracy in a country will
reduce the number of people affected by natural disasters in the future.” The second belief
variable is State of Institutions, which measures perceptions about how the relevant insti-
tution has evolved in Türkiye. This variable is constructed by taking the average of two
five-point scales that assess the extent to which both media and democracy are perceived to
be better today (April-May, 2023) than they were in 2000. Throughout the rest of the pa-
per we standardized these two perception variables, so magnitudes always refer to standard
deviation units.
(2) turnout intentions.
(3) intentions of voting for the opposition.
We also collected a battery of individual-level demographic variables, as detailed in Ap-
pendix Table A-3.
3.2 Field Experiment
Recruitment and Sample In December 2022, we extended invitations to the five parties
represented in parliament, AKP, CHP, HDP, İYİ Party, and MHP, to participate in our
study. We directed our communications—an initial invitation email and two subsequent
follow-ups—to both the general secretary of each party and the principal local contacts in
Türkiye’s three largest provinces, Ankara, Istanbul, and Izmir. Our communications briefly
introduced our research team, outlined the study’s objectives, and requested a meeting to
11

further discuss the study’s nature.8 CHP and the İYİ Party responded to our invitation and
the door-to-door information campaigns were administered in Izmir, Türkiye’s third-largest
province, in collaboration with these two parties, between April 14 and May 12 of 2023.
To ensure uniformity in the campaign across different neighborhoods, all canvassers un-
derwent training organized by their own party and received uniform instructions on basic
techniques for engaging with voters and relevant information on the campaign. Some can-
vassers were asked to work with a civic, non-partisan organization, SahadaBiriz, and we refer
to these as non-aﬀiliated canvassers.
All canvassers were instructed to knock on each door and deliver the information to an
adult member of the household. After introducing themselves, the canvassers initiated a
brief conversation during which the relevant informational treatment was delivered. They
were told to politely present the information, not be persuasive, and to end the conversation
immediately if the voter wanted them to. In addition, they were told to listen carefully and
not rush to the next door if the voter wanted to continue the conversation. This protocol was
provided by the campaign managers and role-played during the training. The conversation
content was guided by pamphlets that varied according to the treatment assignment, which
we describe below. Canvassers were instructed to leave a pamphlet behind the door even
when conversations were not completed (e.g., when no one was at home). Canvassers logged
their interactions with each household, noting completed conversations, pamphlet distribu-
tions, instances where doors were not opened, or rejections after the door was opened. To
facilitate more eﬀicient canvassing, we also geocoded each street within the neighborhoods
and provided canvassers with an optimized route to follow.
Randomization between different informational treatments and the control group, as well
as other cross-randomization, were at the neighborhood level, and we used data from the
June 24, 2018 parliamentary election to exclude from our sample neighborhoods that were
too remote or that would require more time that our canvassers had for visiting a suﬀicient
number of voters. We ended up with a final experimental sample of 554 neighborhoods,
out of which 252 were randomly selected as treatment neighborhoods.9 These treatment
neighborhoods contained 404,862 voters according to our 2018 parliamentary election rolls.
See Appendix Table A-4 for details.
Treatments To simplify the field experiment, we focused on media freedom and corrup-
tion. The key dimension of our randomization was between two informational treatments
and a control group. The first informational treatment, which we call high-credibility infor-
8Additional details are available here.
9For each treatment group, we chose a well-balanced sample from 100,000 possible re-randomizations to
minimize random imbalances, following the approach outlined by Banerjee et al. [2017].
12

mational treatment, aimedatprovidinginanimpartialmannerthemostcredibleinformation
we had on the basis of research articles. We also implemented a basic informational treat-
ment, which used less impartial and more concrete/evocative language about media freedom
and corruption. It contained a call to action, consistent with the opposition parties’ agenda.
These two treatments had their own separate pamphlets that were shared with households.
In addition, we also cross-randomized according to the identity of the canvassers—from
either the CHP, or the İYİ Party, or non-aﬀiliated canvassers. This second dimension of
randomization will feature in our interpretations and discussions, but is not central to our
main results.
The exact texts for these two treatments were:
• High-credibility informational treatment:
Impartial and independent media play a vital role in democracies. Researchers state
that unbiased and independent media are critical in providing accurate information to
the public.
Researchers state that as media independence worsens, corruption increases.
Whenthemediadoesnotreportoncorruption, realandaccurateinformationishidden
from the public, making it easier to hide corruption.
Oﬀicial data show that media neutrality and independence have declined rapidly in
Türkiye in the last 30 years.
The pamphlet also depicted the decline of media independence and the rise of corruption
in Türkiye over a 30-year period and showed a figure illustrating the indices of media inde-
pendence and corruption for 1990, 2000, 2010, and 2022 from V-DEM. The pamphlets for
this treatment, separately for non-aﬀiliated, CHP and İYİ Party canvassers, are presented
in the left column of Appendix Figure A-3.
• Basic informational treatment:
One of Türkiye’s biggest problems is corruption.
Transparency and accountability are the foundation for a better future.
Say no to corruption, look to the future with hope.
To fight corruption, today is the time for change.
Become a partner in our demand for transparency in Türkiye.
Let’s protect democracy together.
13

The pamphlet for this treatment, again separately for non-aﬀiliated, CHP and İYİ Party
canvassers, are presented on the right of Appendix Figure A-3, which corresponds, from top
to bottom, non-aﬀiliated, CHP, and İYİ, respectively.
The basic informational treatment is included in part because all parties were intending
to carry out a similar door-to-door campaign. So in order to convince both opposition
and government coalition parties, our invitation did not require them to discontinue their
campaigns and the parties that agreed to our study chose to keep their pre-existing plans,
but allowed us to add our high-credibility treatment. They also did not agree to any type
of placebo treatment. Although we worked with them in the exact wording of the basic
informational treatment, our interpretation is that this would have been implemented more
or less at the same scale without our involvement, and hence, we believe that its effects on
voters and actual vote shares would have occurred without our study.
Ex ante, we were unsure about which of the two treatments would be more effective. The
first contains higher-quality, more impartial information, while the second may be easier for
voters to understand and can also motivate them to turn out, which was a priority for our
local partners.
Outcome Variables In the field experiment, our outcome variables come from adminis-
trative data on ballot box-level vote shares and turnout, which we obtained from the website
of the Turkish Supreme Election Council.10
4 Results from the Online Experiment
In this section, we discuss our empirical strategy and present the headline results from the
online experiment. In the next section, we turn to the field experiment, and then discuss
mechanisms combining data from both online and field experiments in Section 6.
4.1 Empirical Strategy for Online Experiment
To simplify the exposition and maximize statistical power, we start with bundled treatments,
whereby the media and democracy informational treatments are combined, and the media
and democracy placebo treatments are also bundled. We later study the effects of each
treatment separately.
10Although we have data at the ballot-box level, we cannot track ballot boxes over time, because multiple
ballot boxes were located at the same address and we can only observe their exact location in 2023. This
explains our choice of conducting the randomization at the neighborhood level.
14

Throughout,wepresentaveragetreatmenteffectsbydifferenttypesoftreatments. Rather
than a comparison of means, we do this by running ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions,
because there are some minor imbalances in pre-treatment covariates between treatment and
control groups, as we describe in the next section.
Throughouttheonlineexperiment, allcomparisonsarebetweenindividuals, andreported
effects are from the following OLS model:
′
Y = π +βT +θP +X γ +ε , (1)
i i i i i
where Y represents one of our outcomes of interest for individual i—self-reported beliefs
i
aboutstateofinstitutions, valuationofinstitutions, votingintentionsandturnoutintentions.
The key right-hand side variables, T and P , are dummies for informational and placebo
i i
treatments. In our main specification, because the media and democracy treatments are
combined, the variables T and P are dummies for (bundled) informational and placebo
i i
treatments. In addition, X is a vector of pre-treatment characteristics, which we include
i
as covariates. The error term ε proxies for all omitted characteristics, and we allow it to
i
be heteroscedastic and report robust standard errors in all regressions. Because the control
group is always omitted, the coeﬀicients β and θ give us the average treatment effects relative
to the control group. We also report p-values for the treatment and the placebo effects being
different.
4.2 Summary Statistics and Balance
Panel A of Appendix Table A-5 provides summary statistics for the main post-treatment
variables and Appendix Table A-3 presents summary statistics and balance tests for baseline
characteristics in the online experiment. We have 4,405 participants, separated between 877
participants for the media informational treatment, 869 for the democracy informational
treatment, 848 for the media placebo treatment, 904 for the democracy placebo treatment,
and 907 in the control group. Given the limited number of participants in this online exper-
iment, some imbalance in pre-treatment characteristics is expected. On the whole, however,
our groups appear relatively well balanced. Out of the 56 tests for balance, only two (per-
ceived level of institutions in 2023 and fighting inflation as a top government priority) show
statistical differences at the 5% level between treatment and control groups, and only five
show differences at the 10% level, which is consistent with sampling variation.
We emphasize, however, that despite the lack of major imbalances given our sample size,
whether we control for some of these statistically insignificant pre-treatment characteristics
may still matter for our estimates and we explore this issue in our robustness analysis.
15

4.3 Voters’ Baseline Views
Ouronlineexperimentalsoenablesustomeasurethebaselineviewsofsupportersofdifferent
parties on the state and valuation of institutions, which will be helpful in interpreting our
experimental results. In this subsection, we summarize these results, focusing on voters
supporting the three blocs with representation in parliament: the People’s Alliance (AKP
and MHP), shown consistently in yellow; the Nation Alliance (CHP and İYİ Party), shown
in dark blue; and HDP, shown in grey.11
Panel A of Figure 2 shows, on the left, that participants who voted for the governing
coalition in 2018 are much more likely to report that autocracy is sometimes preferable to
democracy than are those who supported the other two coalitions or those who did not vote
in 2018 (this is the question we use in the baseline survey for measuring their attitudes
towards democracy). On the right, we see that government supporters in the control group
also have significantly different valuation of institutions (using the index described in Section
3, which is measured at the endline). Relatedly, Appendix Figure A-5 shows that opposition
supporters are also more likely to support a democratic government over an authoritarian
one relative to government coalition supporters.
Panel B of Figure 2 shows summary statistics on voters’ perceptions of how media inde-
pendence and democracy have evolved in Türkiye. The left panel depicts perceived changes
in media independence, while the right panel is for perceived changes in democracy between
2000 and 2022 (see also Appendix Figure A-6 for the levels in 2000 and 2022 separately).
We represent the actual change in the V-DEM dataset by the dashed line. The pattern
that emerges is quite clear: supporters of the governing coalition have a much more fa-
vorable opinion of how media independence and democracy have evolved, and if we take
V-DEM data as ground truth, they are holding significantly more misperceived opinions,
while the views of opposition supporters are broadly in line with the actual decline in media
independence and democracy scores.12
11Appendix Figure A-4 compares vote shares from the 2018 parliamentary election with the self-reported,
pre-treatment voting intentions in our sample, and shows that they are closely aligned.
12We also conducted a baseline survey of a randomly-selected subset of voters in the field experiment.
However, after the elections, nearly all of those who had agreed to the baseline survey no longer wanted
to participate, and newly sampled voters also declined to take part. Although we are consequently unable
to use these data for studying the effects of informational treatments, Appendix Figure A-7 shows that
differences between the views of government and opposition supporters on the evolution of democracy and
media freedom in the field are very similar to those we report from our online experiment.
16

4.4 Experimental Results: Voter Beliefs
We now report the experimental estimates of the informational treatments on voter beliefs.
The main results are presented in Panel A of Figure 3. The left part of Panel A is for
the valuation of institutions, while the right part is for the state of institutions (Appendix
Figure A-8 additionally reports treatment effects on the two components that make up each
of these outcomes). In both panels, we first show the average for the control group, then
we present the bundled treatment effects for the placebo (in green) and the informational
treatment (in blue), and subsequently we separate the placebo and informational treatment
effects between media and democracy treatments. In each case, we provide the two standard
deviation confidence intervals and p-values for these estimates being statistically different
from the control group’s beliefs, and at the top we also report the p-value for the placebo
and the informational treatment effects being statistically distinguishable from each other.
The point estimates are also reported in Tables 1 and A-6. In this subsection we focus on
Figure 3, which presents the main takeaways in the most transparent manner.
Weseeclearlythatinformationaltreatmentshaveledtoasignificantchangeinthebeliefs
of the respondents. In the bundled treatment, there is a difference of 6.5% of a standard
deviationinthevaluationofinstitutionsbetweentheinformationaltreatmentandthecontrol
groups; this difference is statistically significant at 4%. There is no difference between the
control group and the placebo treatment. Moreover, we can comfortably reject that the
informational and the placebo treatments are equal. When we separate the media and the
democracy treatments, the pattern is similar, though the results are slightly less precise,
since the gain in statistical power obtained by combining the two experiments is lost.
In terms of quantitative magnitudes, the difference between the informational treatment
group and the control group is sizable—approximately half (58%) of the difference in the
valuation of institutions between individuals in our control group who reached tertiary edu-
cation and those who did not.
Ontheright,weseeaverysimilarpattern. Theinformationaltreatmentleadstoadecline
of 6.8% of one standard deviation in perceived beliefs about how the state of institutions
have changed since 2000; this effect is statistically different from the control mean at less
than 1%, and statistically distinguishable from the placebo effect at about 1%. The results
are also similar when we separate the media and democracy treatments. Specifically, with
the media treatments, the results and their statistical significance are very similar to the
bundled treatment, and they are a little less precise for the democracy treatment. Likewise,
in terms of quantitative magnitudes, we also find that our treatment effect is half (exactly
50%) of the difference in how individuals with and without tertiary education perceive the
state of institutions.
17

Overall, thehigh-credibility(andaccurate)informationweprovideonlineappearstohave
changed voters’ self-reported beliefs both about the valuation (effectiveness) of institutions
and about how institutions have evolved in Türkiye since 2000. The direction of change
is towards what we interpret as ground truth from the V-DEM data, and thus we can
interpret these results as informational treatments correcting voter misperceptions about
how beneficial democratic institutions are and how much they have been eroded under an
authoritarian leader. Notably, we do not find the same pattern with the placebo treatments
which did not include high-credibility information, bolstering our interpretation that these
experimental results are driven by the informational content of the treatment.
4.5 Experimental Results: Voting
Panel B of Figure 3 shows the impact of the informational and placebo treatments on the
self-reported voting intentions, using exactly the same structure as in Panel A. The same
results and variations are also shown in Panel C of Table 1 and Appendix Table A-6.
The bundled treatment is found to increase the probability of voting for the opposition
by 3.7 percentage points relative to the control group. The placebo treatment has a very
smallandstatisticallyinsignificantcoeﬀicient,andthegapbetweentheinformationalandthe
placebo treatments is quite substantial—3.2 percentage points. The informational treatment
effects are statistically significant at less than 1%, and so is the difference between the
informational and placebo treatments, as shown in Panel B of Figure 3. When we separate
the media and democracy treatments, we find very similar patterns, and in this case, we
have enough statistical power to statistically distinguish informational treatments from both
the control group and the placebo treatments as well.
The quantitative magnitudes are again substantial. The difference between the infor-
mational treatment and control groups is approximately 10% of the opposition vote share
difference between İzmir (the city where our field experiment takes place and an opposition
stronghold) and cities such as Konya and Kayseri, which are government strongholds.
The right-hand side of Panel B of Figure 3 also shows the results for self-reported turnout
intentions, and in this case, we do not find statistically significant effects of the informational
treatment. We return to the interpretation of this finding in Section 6.
Overall, we estimate that the informational treatment not only changes people’s self-
reported beliefs about the state and valuation of institutions, but also makes them more
willing to vote for opposition parties, and the results are quantitatively and statistically
quite significant.
18

4.6 Robustness
The results reported so far are quite robust. One important dimension of robustness pertains
to the set of controls, since, as already noted, there are a few variables that show imbalances
between the treatment and control groups in our online experiment and, given the limited
size of our online sample, even insignificant differences could have effects on estimates. In
Table 1, we see that varying the control set does not have a major impact on the results,
though the magnitudes of the informational treatment become somewhat smaller when we
control for the pre-treatment values of the dependent variables on the right-hand side of the
regression. When we additionally include pre-treatment characteristics which show imbal-
ancesbetweenthetreatmentandcontrolgroupsand/orwhenwecontrolforallpre-treatment
characteristics, this makes no further difference relative to the specification that controls just
for pre-treatment outcome variables. In all cases, the informational treatment remains in
the same direction as in Figure 3 and statistically different from both the control group and
the placebo treatment effects.
In summary, the online experiment shows powerful effects from the informational treat-
ments on beliefs and self-reported voting intentions. Our results are suggestive that these
reflect people’s response to new information—rather than their responses to experimenter
demand effects—since we do not see similar impacts from the placebo treatments. The
weakness of the online experiment is that all of the outcome variables are self-reported. We
next turn to our main results, which are from a large-scale field experiment combined with
administrative data, thus rectifying this concern.
5 Main Results: Field Experiment
In this section we discuss our main results from the field experiment. We start with our
empirical strategy, which is different from the one in the online experiment, since treatment
is now at the neighborhood level. We then turn to descriptive statistics and balance tests,
before proceeding to our main results.
5.1 Empirical Strategy
In our field experiment, we estimate the causal effects at the ballot-box level. Our main
estimates refer to the effect of completed conversations with canvassers, which vary across
neighborhoods and are instrumented by our randomization assignment. Consequently, dif-
ferent neighborhoods have varying proportions of treated households. This leads to the
19

following estimation equation
′
Y = α+γC +X κ+u , (2)
bn n bn bn
where Y is the outcome of interest at the level of ballot box b in neighborhood n, for ex-
bn
ample, the vote share of different parties or presidential candidates. The key right-hand side
variable, C , measures the fraction of households in neighborhood n that have received com-
n
pleted informational treatments. We also sometimes distinguish between the high-credibility
and basic informational treatments, as described above and discussed again later in this sec-
tion.
The vector X represents various ballot box and neighborhood characteristics we control
bn
for in our specifications. In the baseline specification, we follow our pre-analysis plan and
include the following variables in the vector of controls:13 the number of registered voters
at each ballot box in 2023, ballot-box geographic controls (population density, precipitation,
temperature, ruggedness, distancetoIstanbul, anddistancetothecoast), neighborhood-level
controls from the 2018 election (opposition’s vote share, turnout, and number of registered
voters), as well as dummies for different regions and strata fixed effects, which are based on
the sextiles of the 2018 vote share for the opposition alliance.14
Robustness checks with different sets of controls are reported in Table 2 below. Finally,
u denotes an error term capturing all omitted factors influencing voting outcomes at ballot
bn
box b in neighborhood n. Because randomization was at the neighborhood level, throughout
we report standard errors that are robust against heteroscedasticity clustered at the level
of neighborhoods. Because ballots boxes essentially contain the same number of registered
voters, we report unweighted regressions (results from regressions weighted by the number
of actual voters at the ballot-box level are provided in the Online Supplementary Material
and are very similar).
We estimate equation (2) with two-stage least squares (2SLS), instrumenting for C with
n
dummies for different types of treatments at the neighborhood level. In our simpler specifi-
cation, the high-credibility and basic informational treatments are combined together, thus
giving us an analogue of the bundled treatment in the previous section, but in later speci-
fications, we also separate these two different types of treatments. In the field experiment,
we do not have a placebo treatment, but given that the outcome is actual voting behavior,
13Our pre-analysis plan specified that we would control for neighborhood-level variables because we were
unsure whether ballot box-level data would be available. Since we have gained access to these data, we now
include more granular controls on the right-hand side and present the results from alternative specifications
with just neighborhood-level controls in the Online Supplementary Material, which are very similar.
14Weconstructedthesefixedeffectsbydividingthefullrangeofoppositionvotesharesintosixequal-sized
groups (sextiles) and stratifying the randomization by sextile.
20

experimenter demand effects are less likely to be important in this context and we have
already seen that they are not that important in the online experiment.
5.2 Summary Statistics, Balance and Compliance
Panel B of Appendix Table A-5 provides summary statistics for the main post-treatment
variables in the field experiment and Appendix Table A-7 presents summary statistics and
balance tests for the field experiment based on the baseline covariates. There is no evidence
of any statistically significant imbalances in any of our variables, but the 2018 opposition
vote share is two percentage points lower in the high-credibility treatment group than in the
control group and one percentage points higher in the basic treatment group than in the
control group. Though far from statistical significance (p-value for joint significance is 0.28),
these are nontrivial differences and we confirm later in this section that controlling for 2018
vote shares does not have a major impact on our results.
First stages for completion rates are reported in Appendix Table A-8. On average, 35
percent of visits resulted in canvassers successfully completing the conversations and dis-
tributing the pamphlets to households. There is also no evidence that completion rates
differed systematically between the high-credibility informational treatment and the basic
informational treatment, but they do appear to be significantly different by canvasser aﬀil-
iation, with non-aﬀiliated canvassers having the highest completion rate. This difference is
largely driven by the capacity constraints faced by İYİ Party, which had a smaller number
of canvassers. Our 2SLS estimates take care of these differences in completion rates.
5.3 Main Results from the Field Experiment
Our main results are reported in Figure 4. Panel A displays the effects of the bundled
treatments on the opposition vote shares in the first-round and second-round presidential
elections and the parliamentary elections. Panel B shows turnout effects, while Panel C
looks at longer-term effects by estimating the impact on the 2024 municipal elections. The
same results are also shown in Table 2.
Thepatternsfromourfieldexperimentareveryclear. Analogouslywithouronlineexper-
iment results, the informational treatment has a statistically significant and quantitatively
substantive effect on opposition vote shares. The bundled treatment increases the opposi-
tion’s vote share in the first-round presidential election by 2.4 percentage points (equivalent
to a 4.4 percent increase relative to the control mean). A standard Wald test comfortably
rejects the hypothesis that the bundled treatment effects are zero. The results, both quanti-
tatively and statistically, are very similar in the second-round presidential election and in the
21

parliamentary election. In particular, using the same benchmark as in our online experiment
results, the 2.4 percentage point impact is about 6% of the average difference between the
opposition vote share in the opposition stronghold Izmir and the government strongholds,
Konya and Kayseri.
Panel B, on the other hand, shows no impact on turnout, which is consistent with the
online voting intention results. This means, in particular, that the vote share results in Panel
A are not driven by differential increases in turnouts in some neighborhoods.
Interestingly, in Panel C, we see a marginally significant positive effect from the bundled
informationaltreatmentontheopposition’svoteshareinthe2024municipalelections, about
a year after our experiment. Though the estimated effect is only marginally significant, it is
a surprising and noteworthy result as it suggests that accurate information may have swayed
some voters suﬀiciently to alter their long-term allegiances and/or voting patterns. Table 2
also shows that there are no turnout effects in the 2024 municipal elections.
Figure 5 presents the effects of the high-credibility and basic informational treatments
separately and also depicts heterogeneous effects by canvasser aﬀiliation. The main take-
aways are as follows. First, voters are slightly more responsive to the high-credibility in-
formational treatment, but the differences with the basic informational treatments are not
statistically significant. One possible interpretation, which we find ex ante plausible but
are not able to further verify, is that some voters respond more to high-quality information,
but, on the other hand, a larger fraction of voters may understand and respond to basic
information, which also has some sloganeering element. When averaged out across different
types of voters, the two treatments give relatively comparable average effects.
The second important finding in Figure 5 is that voters respond more to non-aﬀiliated
canvassers than to those aﬀiliated with the opposition parties, though the differences are
typically not statistically significant. This is quite plausible, since some voters will attach
greater credibility to non-aﬀiliated canvassers and the information they provide. We return
to an interpretation of this dimension of heterogeneity in the next section.
5.4 Robustness
Table 2 presents the same results as in Figure 4 with different controls. It shows that, in
the field experiment, varying the set of covariates has essentially no effect on the estimates,
though they become more precise because vote shares are very persistent over time, which
is what motivated our main specification including the vote shares in 2018, as indicated in
our pre-analysis plan.
AppendixTableA-9probestherobustnessofourresultswhenweseparatehigh-credibility
22

and basic informational treatments and also when we allow for heterogeneous effects by can-
vasser aﬀiliation. The results are very similar to our baseline estimates, with the exception
that the magnitude of the high-credibility treatment effect is lower and that of the basic
treatment is higher when we only include strata fixed effects (columns 1, 4, 7 and 10). This
is due to the differences in the opposition vote share in 2018, noted above, and given this
difference, we believe that the estimates that control for the opposition vote share in 2018
are again more reliable. In any case, the informational treatments are always statistically
significant and the overall picture that emerges is very similar across specifications.
Appendix TableA-10exploresthe robustnessof ourmain resultsto varyingthedefinition
of the endogenous variable. For reference, Panel A starts with our main specification, with
the fraction of completed conversations with canvassers as the endogenous right-hand side
variable (as in Panel A of Table 2). Panel B presents our reduced-form estimates. Panels
C and D report the 2SLS results with, respectively, the fraction of initiated conversations
with canvassers and the fraction of pamphlets left as the endogenous regressor. Overall, the
treatment effects are statistically significant in all panels. The point estimates in Panel C,
whenweuseinitiatedconversationsasthekeyright-handsidevariable, arenearlyidenticalto
those in Panel A, because only a negligible fraction of conversations (about 0.1%) were ended
prematurely after initiation. In Panel D, the point estimates are very similar to the reduced-
form estimates in Panel B, because canvassers were instructed to leave a pamphlet even if
a conversation was not initiated, so in our sample 79.5% of treated households received a
pamphlet. Likewise, Appendix Table A-11 presents analogous robustness checks focusing on
turnout. Overall, theresultsinthesetablesshowthattheexactwayinwhichtheendogenous
regressor is defined does not change the main conclusions of our analysis.
In sum, our field experiment provides strong support for the hypothesis that, when con-
fronted with accurate information, voters can change their votes, and to the extent that this
information corrects misperceptions about the valuation/effectiveness of democratic institu-
tions as well as about the state of institutions under authoritarian leaders, it can bolster
support for more pro-democratic parties (or reduce support for authoritarian incumbents).
6 Mechanisms
In this section, we argue that the results presented so far are driven in large part because our
accurate informational treatments convinced voters who had greater misperceptions about
thestateofTurkishinstitutionsandwhowerepreviouslymorelikelytosupportthegoverning
coalition.
To start with, recall that we find no turnout effects either in the online or the field
23

experiments. Hence, a simple story based on mobilizing opposition voters already looks less
likely on the basis of this finding.
More directly, Figure 6 presents the heterogeneous treatment effects based on whether
respondents in the online experiment overestimated or underestimated the deterioration of
institutionalqualityfrom2000totoday(April-May,2023). Thetoppaneldisplaystheresults
for those who underestimated the deterioration of institutional quality at baseline, while the
bottom panel presents the results for those who overestimated or accurately estimated the
deterioration of institutional quality. The figure demonstrates that our results are driven by
participants in the top panel. These are the people who, after the informational treatment,
changed their valuation of institutions and their assessment of the state of institutions,
and then became more likely to vote for the opposition. The interpretation that this is a
consequence of the accurate, high-credibility information is also bolstered by the fact that
we do not see a quantitatively important or statistically significant effect from the placebo
treatment in this top panel.
In contrast to this pattern, we do not detect any positive effects on either one of our
three outcome variables from the informational treatment in the bottom panel (the exact
point estimates are presented in Appendix Table A-12).15
We find the same general pattern in our field experiment. In particular, Figure 7 shows
heterogeneous effects by the vote share of the opposition in the 2018 parliamentary election
at the neighborhood level. The top panel is for neighborhoods where the vote share of the
oppositionwasbelowmedian—whichcanbroadlybethoughtofasneighborhoodssupporting
the governing coalition. The bottom panel is for neighborhoods where the opposition’s vote
share was above the median in 2018 (the exact point estimates are presented in Appendix
Table A-13). The pattern is quite clear: our field experiment results are driven by the
neighborhoods in the top panel, where the informational treatment effects in all three 2023
elections are much larger than in the bottom panel. The effects for the two rounds of the
presidential election are also statistically significant at 5% and the one for the parliamentary
election is significant at 10%. In contrast, the impact of the informational treatment is much
smaller and far from statistical significance in the bottom panel.16 For example, in Panel
A, while the informational treatment increases the opposition’s vote share in the first-round
and second-round presidential elections by 3.8 and 4.2 percentage points, respectively, the
same effects are only 1.2 and 0.7 percentage points in Panel B.
15Appendix Figures A-9 and A-10 show similar patterns by separating participants between those who
were neutral or favorable towards authoritarianism versus those who were unfavorable, and also between
those who self-reported voting for or against the governing coalition in 2018.
16Appendix Figure A-12 show the heterogeneous effects for the high credibility and basic informational
treatments separately.
24

These results therefore suggest two noteworthy conclusions. First, our informational
treatments were viewed as credible, including by a significant fraction of government sup-
porters. Second, and partially as a result of the first observation, the informational treat-
ments had a bigger impact on those that had more misperceived baseline beliefs about either
the state of democratic institutions in Türkiye or their effectiveness in delivering policies and
outcomes desired by the population.
If this is indeed the correct mechanism, it points to a hopeful interpretation—accurate
and high-quality information can bridge gaps between ideologically divided communities of
voters. It also contrasts with other settings in which new information about the performance
of a party further polarizes voters because supporters of the party disfavored by the new
information do not believe it. In our case, this seems not to have happened either online or
in the field. It is worth noting, however, that this does not mean that the credibility of the
information and how and by whom it was delivered are unimportant. On the contrary, the
fact that non-aﬀiliated canvassers had bigger impacts suggests that credibility still matters,
and our interpretation of this heterogeneous effect is that government supporters were less
likelytobeswayedwhentheinformationaboutthestateofinstitutionscamefromcanvassers
aﬀiliated with the opposition parties.
7 Conclusion
The last two decades have witnessed increasing resilience and durability of several author-
itarian regimes around the world, in stark contrast to perspectives rooted in the “end of
history” predicting the “the end point of mankind’s ideological evolution and the univer-
salization of Western liberal democracy as the final form of human government”—or more
simply, thevictoryofliberalcapitalism(e.g., Fukuyama[1989],Sen[1999]). Accordingtothe
Freedom House, every year since 2006 the number of countries moving away from democracy
around the world has exceeded the number of those improving their democratic institutions
(Freedom House [2023]). Social science is still at a loss in explaining these sweeping trends.
Two sets of ideas have emerged as popular bookends in these debates. The first claims
that many cultures around the world do not value democracy and hence their peoples do not
demand, or at the very least do not fight for, democratic institutions (e.g., Gessen [2017],
Huntington [1997], Mitter and Johnson [2021]). The second instead sees the durability of
authoritarian regimes in their ability to use propaganda, misinformation and social control
(e.g., Esberg [2021], Guriev and Treisman [2022], King et al. [2013], McMillan and Zoido
[2002]). Related to this second perspective, citizens under authoritarian regimes may be
discouraged from participation or may simply lose interest in politics (e.g., Croke et al.
25

[2016], Chen and Yang [2019]). Despite growing interest and a blossoming literature in this
area, we are far from a comprehensive understanding of these issues.
In this paper, we study these questions in the context of the historic May 2023 election
in Türkiye, taking place under the shadow of growing authoritarianism of President Recep
Tayyip Erdog̃an and his AKP Party. We designed an online experiment and a large-scale
field experiment, where Turkish voters were presented with accurate information on how
democracy and media freedom have evolved in the country and their role in dealing with
natural resource disasters and corruption—two issues that were top of mind for Turkish
citizens in 2023. We document that, before experiment, the majority of the supporters
of the governing coalition had major misperceptions about these issues—they considered
Türkiye to be more democratic and to have a more free and independent media than it did
in practice (compared to V-DEM scores), and they systematically underestimated the value
of democracy and free media in combating natural disasters and corruption (compared to
the general consensus in the research literature).
Against this background, if the information we provided turned out to be disregarded by
Turkish voters, this would be evidence that they do not care about democratic institutions
or have been firmly convinced by propaganda that either Turkish institutions are suﬀiciently
democratic or there is not much to gain from greater democracy or media freedom. In the
event, we found the opposite. Online, the informational treatment had a large effect on be-
liefs about the state of democracy and media freedom in Türkiye and their utility, as well as
an equally large impact on voting intentions—increasing the likelihood of individuals in our
treatment group voting for the more pro-democracy opposition coalition by 3.7 percentage
points (6.2 percent relative to the control mean). In our field experiment, which included
about 50 percent of 885,000 registered voters in the third-largest city of Türkiye, the infor-
mational treatment at the neighborhood level increased the fraction of the electorate voting
for the opposition by a 2.4 percentage points (4.4 percent relative to the control mean).
Our online experiment also enabled us to show that voters responded to actual information
rather than to experimenter demand effects.
Equally remarkable are our results on mechanisms. One may be worried that this type of
information may further polarize the electorate and any benefits come from mobilizing voters
that were already leaning towards the opposition—or were for other reasons critical of the
government. Wefoundtheopposite. Therearenoturnouteffects, andmoreimportantly, our
results are mostly explained by the responses of voters that have more misperceived beliefs
and by votes in neighborhoods leaning towards the governing coalition. Our results are
consistent with the notion that the credibility of the information matters, since we find that
the same information provided by non-aﬀiliated (independent) canvassers is more effective.
26

This suggests that accurate information that is impartially presented can have an impact on
voters that have lived for an extended period under an authoritarian regime and can even
influence those that are broadly supportive of the authoritarian government.
Our results raise several additional questions that are ripe for future research. Here we
list a few of them.
• Future work can investigate more systematically when new information will have a po-
larizingimpactandwhenitwillbeacceptedbyeventhosewhoaregenerallysupportive
of the party that is disfavored by this information.
• It would also be interesting to investigate what types of misperceptions can be in-
fluenced by accurate information and whether there are dimensions of ideology and
beliefs that are immune to new information. In this context, it may be particularly in-
terestingto distinguishbetweeninformation fromone’s ownsocialnetwork, from social
media, from traditional media, and from parties and politicians. For each source, one
could investigate whether it has typically contributed disproportionately to mispercep-
tions and whether it can effectively correct misperceptions when it provides accurate
information.
• Another interesting area is to explore whether information-political support feedbacks
can lead to self-fulfilling traps—for example, authoritarian governments convincing
their voters that democracy is not for them and this in turn making authoritarian
governments more stable and democracy less likely to take root. Further study of what
types of interventions and shocks can break such traps would also be an interesting
direction.
• It would be very useful to develop theoretical models that can help us understand the
patterns we are seeing in our study and more generally help us integrate this type of
evidence with existing and new theoretical frameworks in the literature.
• Another set of interesting questions is whether new and credible information can have
durable effects (which our results suggest may be the case based on voting patterns
in the municipal elections one year after our experiment) and whether they may build
realistic or overoptimistic aspirations about what democracy can deliver.
• Several other directions on why democracy has been in retreat around the world and
the role of better information and different political strategies in reversing this trend
are additional important areas for research.
27

Figure 1: Evolution of Democracy in Türkiye
A. Evolution of V-DEM Democratic Score
detaerc
si PKA
retsiniM
emirP
semoceb
nağodrE
2202
sv
0002
:ecnereffiD
70
60
50
40
30
1990 2000 2010 2020
B. Evolution of V-DEM Democratic Score Components
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Average Electoral Liberal
Participatory Deliberative Egalitarian
Notes: ThisfigureplotstheevolutionofdemocracyscoresinTürkiyebetween1990and2022,from
the V-DEM data set. Panel A displays the composite democracy index, which is the average of five
indicesmeasuringdifferentdimensionsofdemocracy,electoral,liberal,participatory,deliberativeand
egalitarian. This composite index is also the one used in Acemoglu et al. [2024], where more details
canbefound. PanelBpresentstheevolutionofthefivedimensionsofdemocracyseparately.
28

Figure 2: Baseline Institutional Views
A. Perceived Valuation of Institutions
Autocracy Sometimes Preferable Valuation of Institutions (Control Group)
5 5
4 4
3 3
2 2
1 1
Didn't vote People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP Didn't vote People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP
B. Perceived and Real Change in State of Institutions Between 2000 and April-May, 2023
Media Democracy
40 40
20 20
0
0
-20
-20
Actual (V-DEM)
-40 Actual (V-DEM)
-40
Didn't vote People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP Didn't vote People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP
Notes: This figure presents baseline views of participants in the online experiment by political aﬀiliation (People’s Alliance,
Nation Alliance, HDP supporters, and non-voters). Aﬀiliations are on the basis of self-reported votes in the 2018 election.
PanelAshows,ontheleft,theextenttowhichindividualsupportauthoritariangovernments,andontheright,ourValuation
of Institutionsvariable,whichmeasurestheextenttowhichindividualsbelievethatdemocraticinstitutionsareimportantfor
achieving better outcomes. For this latter variable, we restrict the sample to individuals in the control group to ensure that
the patterns are not impacted by our treatments. Panel B measures perceptions about how respondents think media (on the
left) and democracy (on the right) have evolved between 2000 and 2023. The dashed line indicates the actual change from
theV-DEMdataset. Thewhiskersshow95percentconfidenceintervals. Formoredetailsonvariablesandmeasurement,see
AppendixTableA-1.
29

Figure 3: Treatment Effects on Beliefs and Voting Outcomes in the Online
Experiment
A. Beliefs
Valuation of Institutions State of Institutions
2.9 1.7
2.8 1.6
p=0.00 p=0.07 p=0.02
p=0.01
2.7 p=0.04 p=0.08 p=0.08 1.5 p=0.01 p=0.23
p=0.70
p=0.11
2.6 p=0.71 p=0.98 p=0.54 1.4 p=0.00 p=0.00 p=0.02 p=0.00
2.5 1.3
2.4 1.2
Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment
Control Bundled Media Democracy Control Bundled Media Democracy
B. Voting Outcomes
Vote for the Opposition Turnout
p=0.41 p=0.02
0.75 p=0.33
1.00 p=0.37 p=0.92 p=0.85 p=0.30 p=0.20 p=0.30
0.70
p=0.00 0.95
p=0.00 p=0.01
0.65 p=0.00
p=0.00 p=0.00
0.90
p=0.60 p=0.69 p=0.62
0.60
0.85
0.55 0.80
0.50 0.75
Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment
Control Bundled Media Democracy Control Bundled Media Democracy
Notes: This figure summarizes the main results from the online experiment. It presents estimates of the informational
treatments on voter beliefs in Panel A and self-reported voting intentions in Panel B. Valuation of Institutions measure the
extent to which individuals believe that democratic institutions are important for achieving better outcomes, and State of
Institutionsmeasuresperceptionsofhowdemocraticinstitutionshaveevolvedbetween2000and2023inTürkiye. Bothvariables
areinstandarddeviationunits. VotefortheOppositionandTurnoutaredummyvariablesforvoterintentions. Thedifference
betweentheheightsofthebarsfortreatmentandcontrolgroupsgivesourbaselineestimatesoftheeffectoftheinformational
treatments(corresponding to OLS estimates of equation (1) in the text, whichincludes the full set of pre-treatmentvariables
listed in Appendix Table A-3 as controls). The whiskers show 95 percent confidence intervals, while the p-values on top of
thebarsareforthesedifferencesbeingstatisticallydifferentfromzero. Thep-valuesattheverytoparefortheinformational
treatment being statistically different from the placebo. For more details on variables and measurement, see Appendix Table
A-1.
30

Figure 4: Treatment Effects on Voting Outcomes in the Field Experiment
A. Opposition’s VoteShare (2023 Election) B.VoterTurnout(2023 Election) C. Opposition’s VoteShare (2024 Election)
Presidential First Presidential Second Parliamentary Presidential First Presidential Second Parliamentary Municipal 2024
0.65 0.95 0.65
p=0.03 p=0.03
p=0.02
0.60 p=0.02 0.90 p=0.72 0.60
p=0.91
p=0.81
0.55 0.85 0.55
0.50 0.80 0.50
0.45 0.75 0.45
Control Treatment Control Treatment Control Treatment
Notes: This figure summarizes the main results from the field experiment. It presents ballot box-level estimates of the treatment effects on the opposition’s vote share and
turnoutinthe2023firstandsecondroundpresidential,andparliamentaryelectionsinPanelsAandB,andtheopposition’svoteshareinthe2024municipalelectioninPanel
C. In this figure, we focus on the bundled treatment, which is a dummy variable for either to high-credibility or the basic informational treatment at the neighborhood level.
The difference between the heights of the bars for treatment and control groups gives our baseline estimates of the effect of the informational treatments (corresponding to
the2SLSestimates ofequation (2)inthe text, with thefraction ofhouseholds withcompleted canvassinginstrumentedwithtreatmentdummies). Weincludethe numberof
registered voters at each ballot box in 2023, ballot-box geographic controls (population density, precipitation, temperature, ruggedness, distance to Istanbul, and distance to
thecoast),neighborhood-levelcontrolsfromthe2018election(opposition’svoteshare,turnout,andnumberofregisteredvoters),aswellasdummiesfordifferentregionsand
stratafixedeffects. Thewhiskersshow95percentconfidenceintervals,whilethep-valuesontopofthebarsareforthesedifferencesbeingstatisticallydifferentfromzero. For
moredetailsonvariablesandmeasurement,seeAppendixTableA-1.
31

Figure 5: Unbundled Treatment Effects on Voting Outcomes in the Field Experiment
A. Presidential First B. Presidential Second C. Parliamentary
0.70
p=0.82 p=0.86 p=0.84
p=0.57
0.65 p=0.09
p=0.63 p=0.09 p=0.56 p=0.06 p=0.08 p=0.48
p=0.68 p=0.10 p=0.03 p=0.17
p=0.04 p=0.02
p=0.05 p=0.68
0.60 p=0.12 p=0.02
0.55
0.50
High-credibilit y Basic Non-affiliated İYİ CHP High-credibilit y Basic Non-affiliated İYİ CHP High-credibilit y Basic Non-affiliated İYİ CHP
Control High-credibility vs Basic Canvasser Affiliation Control High-credibility vs Basic Canvasser Affiliation Control High-credibility vs Basic Canvasser Affiliation
Notes: This figure shows results from the field experiment, separately for the high-credibility and basic informational treatments and also the aﬀiliation of the canvasser. It
presents ballot box-level estimates of the treatment effects on the opposition’s vote share in the 2023 first and second round presidential, and parliamentary elections in the
threepanels. Thedifferencebetweentheheightsofthebarsfortreatmentandcontrolgroupsgivesourbaselineestimatesoftheeffectofthedifferentinformationaltreatments
(correspondingtothe2SLSestimatesofequation(2)inthetext,withthefractionofhouseholdswithcompletedcanvassinginstrumentedwithtreatmentdummies). Weinclude
thenumberofregisteredvotersateachballotboxin2023,ballot-boxgeographiccontrols(populationdensity,precipitation,temperature,ruggedness,distancetoIstanbul,and
distancetothecoast),neighborhood-levelcontrolsfromthe2018election(opposition’svoteshare,turnout,andnumberofregisteredvoters),aswellasdummiesfordifferent
regionsandstratafixedeffects. Thewhiskersshow95percentconfidenceintervals,whilethep-valuesontopofthebarsareforthesedifferencesbeingstatisticallydifferentfrom
zero. The p-values at the very top are for the high-credibility and basic informational treatments and the effects from canvassing with different aﬀiliations being statistically
different. Formoredetailsonvariablesandmeasurement,seeAppendixTableA-1.
32

Figure 6: Online Experiment Results Are Driven by Individuals Who Did Not
Previously Believe Institutions Worsened between 2000 and April-May, 2023
A. Underestimate Deterioration in State of Institutions at Baseline
Vote for the Opposition Valuation of Institutions State of Institutions
0.40 2.5 2.5
p=0.00
0.35
p=0.00 2.3 p=0.00 2.3 p=0.29
0.30 p=0.00 p=0.15 p=0.00
2.1 2.1
p=0.37
0.25 p=0.02
1.9 1.9
0.20
0.15 1.7 1.7
Control Placebo Treatment Control Placebo Treatment Control Placebo Treatment
B. Overestimate Deterioration in State of Institutions at Baseline
Vote for the Opposition Valuation of Institutions State of Institutions
3.4 1.1
1.00
p=0.33
p=0.43
p=0.61
0.95 p=0.19 3.2 p=0.53 p=0.20 0.9
p=0.94
0.90 p=0.27 p=0.25
3.0 0.7
0.85
2.8 0.5
0.80
0.75 2.6 0.3
Control Placebo Treatment Control Placebo Treatment Control Placebo Treatment
Notes: Thisfigureplotstreatmenteffectsintheonlineexperimentseparatelyforrespondentswhounderestimatethedeterio-
rationinthestateofinstitutionsatbaseline(PanelA)andthosewhoaccuratelyestimate(oroverestimate)thedeterioration
the deterioration in the state of institutions at baseline (Panel B). We define these two groups as the participants that are,
respectively, below and above the median of the relevant variables. We show separately control means, placebo effects and
informational treatment effects on self-reported intention to vote for the opposition, valuation of institutions and perceived
change in state of institutions. Valuation of Institutions measure the extent to which individuals believe that democratic
institutions are important for achieving better outcomes, and State of Institutions measures perceptions of how democratic
institutions have evolved in Türkiye. These perception variables are in standard deviation units. The difference between the
heights of the bars for treatment and control groups gives our baseline estimates of the effect of the informational treatments
(corresponding to OLS estimates of equation (1) in the text, which includes the full set of pre-treatment variables listed in
AppendixTableA-3ascontrols). Thewhiskersshow95percentconfidenceintervals,whilethep-valuesontopofthebarsare
for these differences being statistically different from zero. The p-values at the very top are for the informational treatment
beingstatisticallydifferentfromtheplacebo. Formoredetailsonvariablesandmeasurement,seeAppendixTableA-1.
33

Figure 7: Field Experiment Results Are Driven by Neighborhoods Previously
Against the Opposition
A. Neighborhoods with Below Median Opposition’s Vote Share in 2018
Presidential First Presidential Second Parliamentary
0.70
0.65
0.60
p=0.03
p=0.06
0.55 p=0.02
0.50
0.45
0.40
Control Treatment
B. Neighborhoods with Above Median Opposition’s Vote Share in 2018
Presidential First Presidential Second Parliamentary
0.70
p=0.29
p=0.27
0.65
p=0.29
0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40
Control Treatment
Notes: Thefigureplotstreatmenteffectsinthefieldexperimentseparatelyforneighborhoodsbelow(PanelA)andabove(Panel
B) the median of the opposition’s vote share in the 2018 parliamentary election. It presents ballot box-level estimates of the
treatmenteffectsontheopposition’svoteshareinthe2023firstandsecondroundpresidentialandparliamentaryelections. In
thisfigure,wefocusonthebundledtreatment,whichisadummyvariableforeithertohigh-credibilityorthebasicinformational
treatmentattheneighborhoodlevel. Thedifferencebetweentheheightsofthebarsfortreatmentandcontrolgroupsgivesour
baselineestimatesoftheeffectoftheinformationaltreatments(correspondingtothe2SLSestimatesofequation(2)inthetext,
with the fraction of households with completed canvassing instrumented with treatment dummies). We include the number
ofregisteredvotersateachballotboxin2023,ballot-boxgeographiccontrols(populationdensity,precipitation,temperature,
ruggedness, distance to Istanbul, and distance to the coast), neighborhood-level controls from the 2018 election (opposition’s
vote share, turnout, and number of registered voters), as well as dummies for different regions and strata fixed effects. The
whiskersshow95percentconfidenceintervals,whilethep-valuesontopofthebarsareforthesedifferencesbeingstatistically
differentfromzero. Formoredetailsonvariablesandmeasurement,seeAppendixTableA-1.
34

Table 1: Bundled Treatment Effects in the Online Experiment – Robustness to
Different Control Sets
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
A. Valuation of Institutions
Placebo 0.024 0.000 -0.010 -0.016 -0.012
(0.042) (0.038) (0.032) (0.033) (0.032)
Treatment 0.097 0.073 0.060 0.055 0.065
(0.041) (0.038) (0.032) (0.033) (0.032)
Observations 4,232 3,966 3,892 3,614 3,614
Mean 2.556 2.556 2.556 2.556 2.556
p-value: Placebo=Treatment 0.032 0.019 0.006 0.007 0.003
B. State of Institutions
Placebo -0.060 -0.030 -0.030 -0.023 -0.028
(0.041) (0.032) (0.020) (0.020) (0.017)
Treatment -0.116 -0.069 -0.060 -0.058 -0.068
(0.041) (0.032) (0.020) (0.020) (0.018)
Observations 4,343 4,070 3,986 3,678 3,678
Mean 1.377 1.377 1.377 1.377 1.377
p-value: Placebo=Treatment 0.092 0.139 0.070 0.039 0.006
C. Vote for the Opposition
Placebo 0.025 0.009 0.005 0.006 0.005
(0.020) (0.015) (0.010) (0.010) (0.009)
Treatment 0.054 0.037 0.032 0.036 0.037
(0.020) (0.016) (0.010) (0.010) (0.009)
Observations 4,275 4,034 3,950 3,636 3,636
Mean 0.593 0.593 0.593 0.593 0.593
p-value: Placebo=Treatment 0.077 0.032 0.002 0.001 0.000
No controls Yes
Outcome at baseline Yes Yes Yes Yes
Imbalanced controls Yes Yes Yes
Full set of controls Yes
Notes: This table explores the robustness of our main results from the online experi-
ment to varying the set of controls. Panels are for evaluation of institutions (Panel A),
perceived change in state of institutions (Panel B) and self-reported intention to vote
fortheopposition(PanelC)(seenotes tofiguresfor definitions). Column1includes no
controls. Column 2 includes the pre-treatment value of the dependent variable for the
same individual. Columns 3 and 4 additionally include the baseline variables for which
we observe imbalances in Table A-3 at 5% and 10% level, respectively, while Column 5
includesallbaselinecharacteristicswehaveaccessto. Thetablealsoreportsthenumber
ofobservations,themeanofthedependentvariableandthep-valuefortheplaceboand
informational treatments being equal. Standard errors are robust against heteroskedas-
ticity. Formoredetailsonvariablesandmeasurement,seeAppendixTableA-1.
35

Table 2: Bundled Treatment Effects in the Field Experiment – Robustness to Different Control Sets
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
Presidential First Presidential Second Parliamentary Municipal 2024
A. Dependent Variable is Opposition’s Vote Share
Treatment 0.023 0.023 0.023 0.021 0.021 0.021 0.022 0.021 0.021 0.028 0.027 0.031
(0.022) (0.011) (0.010) (0.021) (0.012) (0.010) (0.021) (0.010) (0.010) (0.020) (0.015) (0.013)
Observations 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,840 2,840 2,840
Mean 0.548 0.548 0.548 0.582 0.582 0.582 0.579 0.579 0.579 0.556 0.556 0.556
B. Dependent Variable is Turnout
Treatment -0.003 -0.002 -0.002 -0.002 -0.000 -0.001 -0.003 -0.001 -0.001 -0.013 -0.010 -0.009
(0.008) (0.005) (0.005) (0.009) (0.006) (0.005) (0.009) (0.006) (0.005) (0.015) (0.014) (0.010)
Observations 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,840 2,840 2,840
Mean 0.878 0.878 0.878 0.853 0.853 0.853 0.867 0.867 0.867 0.781 0.781 0.781
Strata fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Outcome in 2018 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Full set of controls Yes Yes Yes Yes
Notes: Thistableexplorestherobustnessofourmainresultsfromthefieldexperimenttovaryingthesetofcontrols. Outcomesincludeopposition’svoteshareandturnout,inpanelsAand
Brespectivelywhicharepresentedforthe2023presidential,the2023presidentialrun-off,the2023parliamentary,andthe2024localelectionsasindicatedintheheader. Theestimatesare
basedon2SLSestimatesofequation(2)inthetext,withthefractionofhouseholdswithcompletedcanvassinginstrumentedwithtreatmentdummies. Columns1,4,7,and10includesonly
stratafixedeffects. Columns2,5,8,and11includestratafixedeffectsandtheoutcomeinthepre-treatmentperiod(2018). Columns3,5,9,and12includethenumberofregisteredvotersat
eachballotboxin2023,ballot-boxgeographiccontrols(populationdensity,precipitation,temperature,ruggedness,distancetoIstanbul,anddistancetothecoast),neighborhood-levelcontrols
fromthe2018election(opposition’svoteshare,turnout,andnumberofregisteredvoters),aswellasdummiesfordifferentregionsandstratafixedeffects. Thetablealsoreportsthenumber
ofobservations,themeanofthedependentvariableandthep-valuefortheplaceboandinformationaltreatmentsbeingequal. Standarderrorsareclusteredattheneighborhoodlevelandare
robustagainstheteroskedasticity. Formoredetailsonvariablesandmeasurement,seeAppendixTableA-1.
36

References
Daron Acemoglu, Ali Cheema, Asim I. Khwaja, and James A. Robinson. Trust in state
and nonstate actors: Evidence from dispute resolution in Pakistan. Journal of Political
Economy, 128(8):3090–3147, 2020.
Daron Acemoglu, Nicolas Ajzenman, Cevat Giray Aksoy, Martin Fiszbein, and Carlos
Molina. (Successful) democracies breed their own support. Review of Economic Stud-
ies, 2024.
Daron Acemoglu and E. Murat Üçer. High-quality versus low-quality growth in Turkey:
Causes and consequences. CEPR Discussion Paper Series, (14070), 2019.
Maja Adena, Ruben Enikolopov, Maria Petrova, Veronica Santarosa, and Ekaterina Zhu-
ravskaya. Radio and the rise of the Nazis in prewar Germany. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 130(4):1885–1939, 2015.
Hassan Afrouzi, Carolina Arteaga, and Emily Weisburst. Is it the message or the messen-
ger? Examining movement in immigration beliefs. Journal of Political Economy Microe-
conomics, 2(2):244–297, 2024.
Firoz Ahmed, Ronald Hodler, and Asad Islam. Partisan effects of information campaigns in
competitive authoritarian elections: Evidence from Bangladesh. Economic Journal, 134
(660):1303–1330, 2023.
Eric Arias, Horacio Larreguy, John Marshall, and Pablo Querubín. Priors Rule: When
Do Malfeasance Revelations Help Or Hurt Incumbent Parties? Journal of the European
Economic Association, 20(4):1433–1477, 2022.
Abhijit Banerjee, Sylvain Chassang, and Erik Snowberg. Decision theoretic approaches to
experiment design and external validity. In Handbook of Economic Field Experiments,
volume 1, pages 141–174. 2017.
Ceren Baysan. Persistent polarizing effects of persuasion: Experimental evidence from
Turkey. American Economic Review, 112(11):3528–3546, 2022.
Timothy Besley and Robin Burgess. The political economy of government responsiveness:
Theory and evidence from India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4):1415–1451,
2002.
Timothy Besley and Torsten Persson. Democratic values and institutions. American Eco-
nomic Review: Insights, 1(1):59–76, 2019.
37

Aymo Brunetti and Beatrice Weder. A free press is bad news for corruption. Journal of
Public Economics, 87(7):1801–1824, 2003.
Yiming Cao. Audit of god: Hometown connections and building damage in the Sichuan
Earthquake. Working Paper, 2024.
Yuyu Chen and David Y. Yang. The impact of media censorship: 1984 or brave new world?
American Economic Review, 109(6):2294–2332, 2019.
Albert Chong, Ana L. De La O, Dean Karlan, and Leonard Wantchekon. Does corruption
information inspire the fight or quash the hope? A field experiment in Mexico on voter
turnout, choice, and party identification. Journal of Politics, 77(1):55–71, 2015.
Kevin Croke, Guy Grossman, Horacio Larreguy, and John Marshall. Deliberate disen-
gagement: How education can decrease political participation in electoral authoritarian
regimes. American Political Science Review, 110(3):579–600, 2016.
Cesi Cruz, Julien Labonne, and FrancescoTrebbi. Campaigning against populism: Emotions
and information in real election campaigns. CEPR Discussion Paper, 2024.
Sirianne Dahlum, Torbjørn Hanson, Ashild Johnsen, Andreas Kotsadam, and Alexander
Wuttke. Is support for authoritarian rule contagious? Evidence from field and survey
experiments. Working Paper, 2024.
Ruben Enikolopov, Maria Petrova, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. Media and political persua-
sion: Evidence from Russia. American Economic Review, 101(7):3253–85, 2011.
Ruben Enikolopov, Michael Rochlitz, Koen J. L. Schoors, and Nikita Zakharov. The effect
of independent online media in an autocracy. SSRN Working Paper, 2023.
José Ramón Enríquez, Horacio Larreguy, John Marshall, and Alberto Simpser. Mass Po-
litical Information on Social Media: Facebook Ads, Electorate Saturation, and Electoral
Accountability in Mexico. Journal of the European Economic Association, 22(4):1678–
1722, 02 2024.
Jane Esberg. Anticipating dissent: The repression of politicians in Pinochet’s Chile. The
Journal of Politics, 83(2):689–705, 2021.
Claudio Ferraz and Frederico Finan. Exposing corrupt politicians: The effects of Brazil’s
publicly released audits on electoral outcomes. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2):
703–745, 2008.
38

Steven Finkel, Anja Neundorf, and Ericka Ramírez. Can online civic education induce
democratic citizenship? Experimental evidence from a new democracy. American Journal
of Political Science, 68(2):613–630, 2024.
Freedom House. Freedom in the world 2023: Marking 50 years in the struggle for democracy.
Technical report, 2023.
Freedom House. Freedom in the world: The mounting damage of flawed elections and armed
conflict. Technical report, 2024.
NicolaFuchs-SchundelnandMatthiasSchundeln. Ontheendogeneityofpoliticalpreferences:
Evidence from individual experience with democracy. Science, 347(6226):1145–1148, 2015.
Francis Fukuyama. The end of history? The National Interest, 16:3–18, 1989.
Masha Gessen. The Future Is History: How Totalitarianism Reclaimed Russia. Riverhead
Books, 2017.
Matthew H. Graham and Milan W. Svolik. Democracy in America? Partisanship, polariza-
tion, and the robustness of support for democracy in the United States. American Political
Science Review, 114(2):392–409, 2020.
Sergei Guriev and Daniel Treisman. Spin Dictators: The Changing Face of Tyranny in the
21st Century. Princeton University Press, 2022.
Samuel P. Huntington. The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order. Simon
and Schuster, 1997.
Isra Imtiaz, Shotaro Nakamura, Sanval Nasim, and Arman Rezaee. Beliefs, signal quality,
and information sources: Experimental evidence on air quality in Pakistan. International
Growth Centre Working Paper Series, 22039, 2024.
Matthew E. Kahn. The death toll from natural disasters: The role of income, geography,
and institutions. Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(2):271–284, 2005.
Gary King, Jennifer Pan, and Margaret E. Roberts. How censorship in China allows govern-
ment criticism but silences collective expression. American Political Science Review, 107
(2):326–343, 2013.
Brian Knight and Ana Tribin. Opposition media, state censorship, and political account-
ability: Evidence from Chavez’s Venezuela. The World Bank Economic Review, 36(2):
455–487, 2022.
39

Horacio Larreguy, John Marshall, and Jr. Snyder, James M. Publicising Malfeasance: When
the Local Media Structure Facilitates Electoral Accountability in Mexico. The Economic
Journal, 130(631):2291–2327, 05 2020.
John McMillan and Pablo Zoido. How to subvert democracy: Montesinos in Peru. Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 18(4):69–92, 2002.
Rana Mitter and Elsbeth Johnson. What the West gets wrong about China: Three funda-
mental misconceptions. Harvard Business Review, 2021.
Leonid Peisakhin and Arturas Rozenas. Electoral effects of biased media: Russian television
in Ukraine. American Journal of Political Science, 62(3):535–550, 2018.
Torsten Persson and Guido Tabellini. Democratic capital: The nexus of political and eco-
nomic change. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(2):88–126, 2009.
Eduardo Rivera, Enrique Seira, and Saumitra Jha. Democracy corrupted: Apex corruption
and the erosion of democratic values. Stanford University Graduate School of Business
Working Paper Series, 4166, 2024.
Amartya Sen. Development as Freedom. Oxford University Press, 1999.
Milan W. Svolik. Voting against autocracy. World Politics, 75(4):647–691, 2023.
40

A Appendix
Figure A-1: Experimental Design Online Experiment
Recruitment Using Facebook Ads (April-May 2023)
(N=8,429 clicked ads and started survey)
Baseline Questions (N=5,161)
-Block 1: Socio-demographic characteristics
-Block 2: Social views
-Block 3: Performance of institutions
-Block 4: Political Ideology
Placebo Control Treatment
(40%) (20%) (40%)
Media Democracy Media Democracy
Endline Questions (N=4,405)
-Block 5: Institutions and their changes in Tu¨rkiye
-Block 6: Final questions
Notes: This figure shows the experimental design of the study. A total of 19,151 individuals clicked on the ads and were
redirected to the survey landing page, where they reviewed the consent form. Of these, 8,429 proceeded to start the survey.
A total of 5,161 respondents completed the baseline survey and were then randomly assigned to two treatment groups, two
placebogroups,andacontrolgroup. Intotal,4,405participantscompletedthesurvey,comprisingourfinalsampleforanalysis.
A-1

Figure A-2: Differential Attrition by Treatment Arms – Online Experiment
0.90
0.85
p=0.59
p=0.92 p=0.50
p=0.17
0.80 p=0.43 p=0.38 p=0.40 p=0.50
p=1.00
0.75
0.70
Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment
Control Bundled Media Democracy
Notes: This figure shows the differences in survey completion among individuals assigned to different
treatment arms. See equation (1). The outcome is a dummy that takes the value of one if the participant
didnotcompletethesurvey. Eachbardisplaysthemeanoftheoutcomeforeachofthesegroupsasindicated
on the horizontal axis. The whiskers show 95 percent confidence intervals, while the p-values on top of the
bars are for these differences being statistically different from zero. The p-values at the very top are for
the informational treatment being statistically different from the placebo. For more details on variables and
measurement, see Appendix Table A-1.
A-2

Figure A-3: Pamphlets in the Field Experiment
A. High-credibility Pamphlet for Non-aﬀiliated B. Basic Pamphlet for Non-aﬀiliated
CORRUPTION
INDEPENDENT Impartial and independent media play a vital
MEDIA role in democracies.
a i R n c e d c s e u e p r a e a r n t c e d h i e e n n r f s t o m r s m t e a a d t t e i i a o t n h a a r t e t o u c t n h ri b e ti i c p a a s u l e b i d n li c a p . n ro d v iding WHAT IS Y M O A U Y R 1 4 C ? HOICE ON WHAT IS Y M O A U Y R 1 4 C ? HOICE ON
One b o i f g T g ü e r s k t i ye's LET'S FIGHT
problems is corruption. FOR A
CORRUPTION i R n e d s e e p a e r n c d h e e n rs c e s t w at o e r s th e a n t s a , s c o m rr e u d p ia ti on Transparency and STRONGER
increases. accountability are the DEMOCRACY.
foundation for a better
future.
When the media does not report on
corruption, real and accurate information is Say no to corruption,
h h i i d d e d e c n o r fr r o u m pt i t o h n e . public, making it easier to look to th h e o p fu e t . ure with
To fight corruption,
LET'S FIGHT today c is h a th n e g e ti . me for
To Contribute to CORRUPTION To Contribute to
Democracy TOGETHER, Be o c u o r m d e e a m p a a n r d t n fo er r in Democracy
LET'S MAKE tran T s ü p r a k r i e y n e c . y in
TÜRKİYE
indep O e ff n ic d i e a n l c d e a t h a a s v h e o d w e c th lin at e d m r e a d p ia id n ly e u in tr T a ü lit r y k i a y n e d in the STRONG. dem L o e c t r ' a s c p y r o to te g c e t t her.
last 30 years.
At the same time, corruption has increased signicantly. This brochure has been prepared by SahadaBiriz Volunteers. This brochure has been prepared by SahadaBiriz Volunteers.
Thank you for taking the time. Thank you for taking the time.
C. High-credibility Pamphlet for CHP D. Basic Pamphlet for CHP
CORRUPTION
M IN E D D E I P A ENDENT r Im ol p e a i r n t i d a e l m an o d c r in a d c e ie p s e . ndent media play a vital OUR CHOICE OUR CHOICE
Researchers state that unbiased and THE NATION'S PRESIDENT THE NATION'S PRESIDENT
independent media are critical in providing
accurate information to the public.
KEMAL KILIÇDAROĞLU One b o i f g T g ü e r s k t i ye's LET'S FIGHT KEMAL KILIÇDAROĞLU
CORRUPTION Researchers state that as media problems is corruption. FOR A
i i n n d cr e e p a e s n e d s e . nce worsens, corruption A ac T c r o a u n n s t p a a b r i e li n ty c y a r a e n t d he D S E T M R O O C N R G A E C R Y. A
foundation for a
When the media does not report on LIBERATION better future. LIBERATION
corruption, real and accurate information is
h h i i d d e d e c n o r fr r o u m pt i t o h n e . public, making it easier to STORY Sa lo y o n k o t t o o t c h o e r f r u u t p u t r i e o n, STORY
with hope.
To fight
corruption, today
LET'S FIGHT is the time for
EPISODE 1: Corruption CORRUPTION change. EPISODE 1: Corruption
TOGETHER, Become a partner in
Official data show that media neutrality and For the Continuation of the Story LE S T T T Ü ' R S R O K M N İY A G E K . E t o r u a L n r e T s t d ' ü p s e r a m p k r r i e a y o n n e t c d e . y c f t o in r For the Continuation of the Story
independence have declined rapidly in democracy together.
Türkiye in the last 30 years.
At the same time, corruption has increased signicantly.
E. High-credibility Pamphlet for İYİ Party F. Basic Pamphlet for İYİ Parti
CORRUPTION
M IN E D D E I P A ENDENT r Im ol p e a i r n t i d a e l m an o d c r in a d c e ie p s e . ndent media play a vital OUR CHOICE OUR CHOICE
Researchers state that unbiased and THE NATION'S PRESIDENT THE NATION'S PRESIDENT
independent media are critical in providing
accurate information to the public. KEMAL KILIÇDAROĞLU One b o i f g T g ü e r s k t i ye's LET'S FIGHT KEMAL KILIÇDAROĞLU
CORRUPTION i R n e d s e e p a e r n c d h e e n rs c e s t w at o e r s th e a n t s a , s c o m rr e u d p ia ti on pro T b r l a e n m s s p a is re c n o c r y r u a p n t d io n. STR FO O R N G A E R
increases. A accountability are the DEMOCRACY. A
foundation for a better
LIBERATION future. LIBERATION
i W c n o f h r o e r r u n m p t a t h i t o e io n m n , r e i e s d a i h l a i a d d n d o d e e n a s c f n r c o o u m t r a r e t t e h p e o r p t u o b n lic, STORY l S o a o y k n to o t t h o e c f o u r t r u u r p e t w io i n th , STORY
making it easier to hide corruption. hope.
To fight corruption,
LET'S FIGHT today c is h a th n e g e ti . me for
EPISODE 1: Corruption CORRUPTION Become a partner in EPISODE 1: Corruption
TOGETHER, our demand for
For the Continuation of the Story LET'S MAKE tran T s ü p r a k r i e y n e c . y in For the Continuation of the Story
TÜRKİYE Let's protect
Official data show that media neutrality and STRONG. democracy together.
independence have declined rapidly in
Türkiye in the last 30 years.
At the same time, corruption has increased signicantly.
A-3

Figure A-4: Alliance Vote Shares from Oﬀicial Records and Self-Reported
Voting Data from the Online Experiment for the 2018 Election
Official
0.5
Online
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP Other
Notes: This figure compares the oﬀicial alliance vote shares from the 2018 parliamentary election with self-
reported voting choices from our baseline survey. The comparison is presented in a color-coded bar chart:
yellow bars represent the People’s Alliance vote share, navy bars show the Nation Alliance vote share, and
grey bars indicate the vote shares for the HDP and other parties. For each alliance, the left bar reflects
the oﬀicial 2018 election results, while the right bar shows the self-reported vote shares from the online
experiment.
A-4

Figure A-5: Additional Summary Statistics on Institutional Preferences by
Alliance Aﬀiliation
Democracy Among All Forms of Government
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
Didn't vote People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP
Notes: This figure shows alternative measures of institutional value, categorized by political aﬀiliation (People’s Alliance,
NationAlliance,HDPsupporters,andnon-voters). Itplotstheshareofindividualswhoresponded“Iwouldpreferdemocracy
amongallformsofgovernment.” Theotheransweroptionsare,“Insomecases,Imaypreferanauthoritariangovernment,”and
“Forsomeonelikeme,itdoesn’tmatterwhetherthegovernmentisdemocraticorauthoritarian.”Thewhiskersindicatethe95
percentconfidenceintervals.
A-5

Figure A-6: Perception of the State of Institutions in 2000 and April-May,
2023 by Political Aﬀiliation
A. Perception of the State of Institutions in 2000
60
45
30
15
0
Didn't vote People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP
B. Perception of the State of Institutions between April and May, 2023
60
45
30
15
0
Didn't vote People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP
Notes: This figure compares voters’ perceptions of democratic institutions in Türkiye between 2000 and April-May 2023 by
political aﬀiliation (People’s Alliance, Nation Alliance, HDP supporters, and non-voters). Aﬀiliations are on the basis of self-
reported votes in the 2018 election. Panels display average responses to the question asked about the state of institutions in
2000(PanelA)andbetweenAprilandMay,2023(PanelB)inTürkiye. Thebarsrepresentmeanscoresforeachpoliticalgroup
basedonself-reportedvotingbehaviorinthe2018election. Thewhiskersindicatethe95percentconfidenceintervals. Formore
detailsonvariablesandmeasurement,seeAppendixTableA-1
A-6

Figure A-7: Baseline Institutional Views in the Online Experiment
A. Media
40
20
0
-20
Actual (V-DEM)
-40
Didn't vote People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP
B. Democracy
40
20
0
-20
Actual (V-DEM)
-40
Didn't vote People's Alliance Nation Alliance HDP
Notes: Thisfigureshowsvoters’perceivedchangeinthestateofinstitutionsbetween2000andApril–
May,2023atbaselinebypoliticalaﬀiliation(People’sAlliance,NationAlliance,HDPsupporters,and
non-voters)andinstitutions(mediaanddemocracy). Aﬀiliationsareonthebasisofself-reportedvotes
in the 2018 election. Panel A shows perceptions of changes in the media from 2000 to 2023, while
Panel B presents perceptions of changes in democracy over the same period. The bars represent the
meanscoresforeachpoliticalgroupbasedonself-reportedvotingbehaviorin2018. Thedashedline
indicatestheactualchangefromtheV-DEMdataset. Thewhiskersindicatethe95percentconfidence
intervals. Formoredetailsonvariablesandmeasurement,seeAppendixTableA-1
A-7

Figure A-8: Treatment Effects on Voters’ Beliefs – Separately for Media and Democracy Outcomes
A. Valuation of Institutions–Media B. Valuation of Institutions–Democracy
2.8 2.8
p=0.01
p=0.01 p=0.23
2.6 p=0.04 2.6
p=0.07 p=0.30
p=0.76 p=0.72 p=0.86
2.4 2.4 p=0.01 p=0.39 p=0.00
p=0.10
p=0.16 p=0.41
p=0.98
2.2 2.2 p=0.48 p=0.23
2.0 2.0
Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment
Control Bundled Media Democracy Control Bundled Media Democracy
C. State of Institutions–Media D. State of Institutions–Democracy
1.8 1.8
1.6 1.6 p=0.03
p=0.02 p=0.02 p=0.02 p=0.23
p=0.38
p=0.46
1.4 p=0.36 p=0.01 p=0.83 p=0.03 p=0.07 p=0.01 1.4 p=0.09 p=0.00 p=0.00 p=0.03 p=0.00
1.2 1.2
1.0 1.0
Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment Placebo Treatment
Control Bundled Media Democracy Control Bundled Media Democracy
Notes: This figure presents estimates of the informational treatments on voters’ valuation of institutions and perceived change in state of institutions, separately for media
anddemocracy. ValuationofInstitutions–Media(PanelA)andValuationofInstitutions–Democracy(PanelB)measuretheextenttowhichindividualsbelievethatmediaand
democracyareimportantforachievingbetteroutcomes,respectively. StateofInstitutions–Media(PanelC)andStateofInstitutions–Democracy(PanelD)measureperceptions
ofhowmediaanddemocracyhaveevolvedbetween2000and2023inTürkiye,respectively. Bothvariablesareinstandarddeviationunits. Thedifferencebetweentheheights
of the bars for treatment and control groups gives our baseline estimates of the effect of the informational treatments (corresponding to OLS estimates of equation (1) in the
text,whichincludesthefullsetofpre-treatmentvariableslistedinAppendixTableA-3ascontrols). Thewhiskersshow95percentconfidenceintervals,whilethep-valueson
topofthebarsareforthesedifferencesbeingstatisticallydifferentfromzero. Thep-valuesattheverytoparefortheinformationaltreatmentbeingstatisticallydifferentfrom
theplacebo. Formoredetailsonvariablesandmeasurement,seeAppendixTableA-1
A-8