The Macroeconomic Impact of Climate Change:
Global vs. Local Temperature*
Adrien Bilal† Diego R. Känzig‡
Stanford University Northwestern University
November, 2024
Abstract
This paper estimates that the macroeconomic damages from climate change are six
timeslargerthanpreviouslythought. Exploitingnaturalglobaltemperaturevariabil-
ity,wefindthat1°CwarmingreducesworldGDPby12%. Globaltemperaturecorre-
latesstronglywithextremeclimaticevents,unlikecountry-leveltemperatureusedin
previouswork,explainingourlargerestimate. Weusethisevidencetoestimatedam-
age functions in a neoclassical growth model. Business-as-usual warming implies a
25%presentwelfarelossandaSocialCostofCarbonof$1,367perton. Theseimpacts
suggestthatunilateraldecarbonizationpolicyiscost-effectiveforlargecountriessuch
astheUnitedStates.
JELclassification: E01,E23,F18,O44,Q54,Q56
Keywords: Climate change, macroeconomic damages, time-series variation, local and
globalshocks
*We thank Marios Angeletos, Marshall Burke, Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, Simon Dietz, Stephane Hal-
legatte, Jim Hamilton, Xavier Jaravel, Ben Jones, Eben Lazarus, Pooya Molavi, Ishan Nath, Ben Olken,
Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Toan Phan, Jón Steinsson, Jeffrey Shrader, Jim Stock, Chris Wolf, and numer-
ous participants at conferences and seminars for helpful comments and suggestions. We thank Ramya
Raghavan, Lilian Hartmann and Cathy Wang for outstanding research assistance. Adrien Bilal gratefully
acknowledgessupportfromtheChaeFamilyEconomicsResearchFundatHarvardUniversity.
†Stanford University, CEPR and NBER. E-mail: adrienbilal@stanford.edu. Web:
www.sites.google.com/site/adrienbilal
‡Northwestern University, CEPR and NBER. E-mail: dkaenzig@northwestern.edu. Web:
www.diegokaenzig.com

1 Introduction
Climatechangeisfrequentlydescribedasanexistentialthreat. Thisview,however,stands
in stark contrast to empirical estimates of the impact of climate change on economic ac-
tivity: they imply that a 1°C rise in temperature reduces world output at most by 1-2%.
Underanyconventionaldiscounting,sucheffectsseemhardlycatastrophic. Whyareper-
ceptions of climate change misaligned with empirical estimates? Do existing estimates
notaccountforthefullimpactofclimatechange,orareitscoststrulysmall?
In this paper, we demonstrate that the macroeconomic impacts of climate change are
sixtimeslargerthanpreviouslydocumented. Werelyonatime-serieslocalprojectionap-
proach to estimate the impact of global temperature on Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
Thisapproachexploitsnaturalvariabilityinglobalmeantemperature—thesourceofvari-
ation closest to climate change—which we show to predict damaging extreme climatic
events much more strongly than country-level temperature. We find that a 1°C rise in
global temperature lowers world GDP by 12% at peak. We then use our reduced-form
results to estimate structural damage functions in a simple neoclassical growth model.
Climate change leads to a present-value welfare loss of 25% and a Social Cost of Carbon
(SCC)of$1,367pertonofcarbondioxide.
In the first part of the paper, we develop our time-series approach. We assemble a
new climate-economy dataset spanning the last 120 years from sources that are regularly
updated up to recent years. We construct global and country-level measures from high-
resolution gridded land and ocean surface air temperature data from Berkeley Earth. We
define physical granular reanalysis measures of extreme temperature, droughts, wind
speed and precipitation from the Inter-Sectoral Impact Model Intercomparison Project
(ISIMIP). We obtain economic data on GDP, population, consumption, investment and
productivity from the Penn World Tables spanning 173 countries from 1960 onward, and
fromtheJordà-Schularick-TaylorMacrohistorydatabaseforselectcountriessince1900.
Identification of the impact of temperature on GDP is complicated by their jointly
trending behavior. We thus construct global and local (country-level) temperature shocks:
innovations to the temperature process that are orthogonal to their long-run trends and
persist for two years using the approach in Hamilton (2018). Our choice of period is
motivated by the geoscience literature. Natural climate variability is driven by multiple
phenomena. Externalcausessuchassolarcyclesandvolcaniceruptionsleadtomedium-
andshort-runfluctuationsintheEarth’smeantemperature. Internalclimatevariability—
1

interactions within the climatic system itself—lead to irregular fluctuations in tempera-
ture and weather extremes. For instance, the El Niño cycle varies unpredictably between
2to7years.
We map out the dynamic causal effects of our global temperature shocks on world
GDP using local projections from 1960 onward. A 1°C global temperature shock leads
to a gradual decline in world GDP that peaks at 12% after 6 years, is statistically signif-
icant at the 5% level in years 3 to 7, and does not fully mean-revert even after 10 years.
Importantly, the temperature shocks have a persistent effect on the temperature level, that
remains above 0.5°C for multiple years after the shock. Hence, the 12% impact partly
reflects the accumulated effects of persistently elevated global temperature itself. These
resultsremainunchangedforalternativede-trendingapproaches,suchasone-stepahead
forecasterrorsoraone-sidedHodrick-Prescottfilter.
Four identification concerns may challenge the causal interpretation of our headline
results. We address each of them in a series of robustness exercises. First, we account for
omitted variable bias: global temperature shocks may coincide with the global economic
andfinancialcycle. Wecontrolforrichmeasuresofworldeconomicperformance: indica-
tors for global economic recessions and global macro-financial variables (past world real
GDP, commodity prices and interest rates). Our results remain unaffected by the specific
set of controls and are not driven by any particularly influential years, indicating that
temperatureshocksarelargelyunrelatedtoeconomicshocks.
Second,weaccountforreversecausality: asoutputdeclinesafteratemperatureshock,
energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions fall, lowering temperatures and in-
creasing output going forward. Qualitatively, reverse causality thus leads us to underes-
timatethetrueimpactofaglobaltemperatureshock. Quantitatively,itislikelynegligible
because short-run fluctuations in emissions imply small temperature variations. We con-
firm these arguments by explicitly adjusting for the impact of past greenhouse gas and
aerosolemissionswithaclimatemodelandfindvirtuallyidenticalresults.
Third, we verify that our estimates are likely externally valid and are stable across
time periods and causes of temperature variation. We find remarkably similar estimates
in three time periods (1900-2019, 1960-2019—our main sample—and 1985-2019) as well
aswhenweexcludeElNiñoandvolcaniceruptionsfromouridentifyingvariation.
Fourth,weaccountforregionalomittedvariablebias: globaltemperaturemaybepar-
ticularlydrivenbysomecountrieswhiletheyalsoexperienceunrelatedGDPgrowth. We
2

obtain virtually identical results when we project country-level GDP—rather than global
GDP—on global temperature, controlling for country fixed effects and region-specific
time trends. Collectively, our robustness exercises suggest that our specification captures
thecausaleffectofglobaltemperatureoneconomicactivity.
Our estimated effect of temperature shocks on world GDP stands in stark contrast
to existing estimates of the economic impact of temperature. Nordhaus (1992), Dell et
al. (2012), Burke et al. (2015) and Nath et al. (2022) find that a 1°C temperature increase
reduces GDP by at most 1-2% in the medium run. Why do we find effects that are six
timeslarger?
We focus on a different source of variation: changes in global mean temperature cap-
ture the comprehensive impact of climate change. By contrast, previous work exploits
changes in country-level, local temperature. When we estimate the impact of local tem-
perature on country-level GDP with the same empirical specification, we find similarly
smallandimpreciseeffectstopreviousstudies: 1%per1°C,notsignificantatthe5%level.
Econometrically,panelanalysesusinglocaltemperaturenetoutcommonimpactsofglobal
temperaturethroughtimefixedeffects. Instead,wefocusonthesecommonimpacts.
Why, then, does global temperature depress economic activity so much more than
local temperature? We show that global temperature is fundamentally different from
local temperature. Global temperature shocks predict a large and persistent rise in the
frequency of four extreme climatic events that cause economic damage: extreme temper-
ature, droughts, extreme wind, and extreme precipitation. By contrast, local temperature
shockspredictamuchweakerriseintheseextremes.
These conclusions are consistent with the geoscience literature: droughts, extreme
wind and precipitation are outcomes of the global climate that depend on ocean tem-
peraturesandatmospherichumiditythroughouttheglobe,ratherthanoutcomesoflocal
temperature realizations (Seneviratne et al., 2016; Wartenburger et al., 2017; Seneviratne
etal.,2021;Domeisenetal.,2023). Inlinewiththisview,wefindthatoceantemperature,
rather than land temperature, is responsible for the vast majority of the effects of global
temperatureoneconomicactivity.
Quantitatively, including these four extreme events accounts for close to two thirds
of our estimated global temperature impact. We reach this conclusion by estimating the
impact of extreme events on GDP, which we combine with the dynamic correlation be-
tweenglobaltemperatureshocksandextremeeventstoconstructacounterfactualimpact
3

of global temperature on GDP. Of course, our aggregation exercise is unlikely to account
for the full effect of global temperature on GDP: we would need to specify and measure
the universe of channels whereby global temperature affects the economy. Using global
temperaturedirectlybypassesthischallenge.
Another possible explanation for the differential impacts of global and local temper-
ature shocks is that general equilibrium linkages together with spatially correlated local
temperature lead panel analyses to underestimate the true impact of local temperature.
However, we find that general equilibrium linkages account for at most one fifth of our
globaltemperatureestimates. Toreachthisconclusion,weconstructanexternaltempera-
tureshockbyaggregatingthelocaltemperatureofalltradingpartnersofagivencountry,
weighted by trade shares. External local temperature turns out to have a similarly small
impactoneconomicactivitytothedirecteffectoflocaltemperature: givenmoderatelev-
elsoftradeopennessthroughouttheworld,indirecteffectscannotbesubstantiallylarger
thandirecteffectsoflocaltemperature.
How and where do the worldwide GDP impacts of global temperature materialize?
Wedocumentasignificantfallincapital,investmentandproductivityafteraglobaltem-
perature shock. Warm and low-income countries appear to be more severely affected
than cold and high-income countries, although these comparisons are somewhat noisy.
Overall however, global temperature has more uniformly detrimental effects than local
temperature.
In the second part of the paper, we develop a simple neoclassical growth model to
translate our reduced-form estimates into welfare effects, similarly to Nordhaus (1992).
We introduce productivity damages from temperature. Critically, we use our novel
reduced-formeffectstoestimatetheassociatedstructuraldamagefunction.
We estimate productivity shocks that correspond to a global temperature shock by
matchingtheestimatedimpulseresponsefunctionofoutput. Thismappinghasaclosed-
form expression that guarantees identification. In doing so, we account for the internal
persistence of global mean temperature in response to temperature shocks. We remain
conservativeandimposepersistentleveleffectsratherthangrowtheffects. Wefindthata
one-time transitory 1°C rise in global mean temperature leads to a 4% peak productivity
decline. The estimated model also matches the untargeted impulse response of capital to
atemperatureshock.
Our main counterfactual is a gradual increase in global mean temperature that starts
4

in 2024 and reaches 3°C above pre-industrial levels by 2100, so 2°C above 2024 tempera-
tures, with a 2% rate of time preference. Climate change implies a precipitous decline in
output of 46% by 2100. Capital shrinks by 37% and consumption drops by 37%, leading
to a 25% welfare loss in permanent consumption equivalent in 2024. These magnitudes
are comparable to the economic damage caused by the 1929 Great Depression, but expe-
riencedpermanently.
If the economic effects of global temperature are so large, why were they not noticed
after nearly 1°C of global warming since 1960? Because climate change occurs in small
increments, its effects are hidden behind background economic variability. We show that
since 1960, climate change caused a gradual reduction in the annual world growth rate
that reaches one third of baseline by 2019. Because climate change is also persistent, its
effects keep accumulating over time. Ultimately, world GDP per capita would be 19%
highertodayhadnowarmingoccurredbetween1960and2019.
The estimated model lets us characterize the SCC using the global temperature re-
sponse to a CO2 pulse from Dietz et al. (2021) and Folini et al. (2024). We remain con-
servative and use the lower end of the range of temperature responses from Dietz et al.
(2021),whichisalsoconsistentwithhistoricalemissionsandwarmingdata.
We obtain a SCC of $1,367 per ton. This value is seven times larger than the high end
of existing estimates ($185 per ton, Rennert et al., 2022). The 95% confidence interval for
the SCC ranges from $469 per ton to $2,264 per ton. While this range is non-trivial, even
its lower bound is multiple times larger than conventional SCC values. Our focus on
global temperature shocks accounts for this substantial difference. When we re-estimate
our model based on the impact of local temperature shocks as in previous research, the
welfare cost of climate change is 3% and the SCC is $178 per ton, and neither of these
valuesisstatisticallysignificantatthe5%level.
How sensitive are these results to specification choices? Any plausible discount rate
and 2100 temperature results in welfare losses in excess of 15% and a SCC above $500
per ton. Discount rates below 1% imply a SCC exceeding $3,000 per ton. Scenarios with
2100warming5°Cabovepre-industriallevelsleadtowelfarelosseslargerthan40%. The
meanclimatesensitivityfromDietzetal.(2021)impliesaSCCabove$1,700perton.
Weconcludebydelineatingtheconsequencesofourresultsfordecarbonizationpolicy.
Decarbonization interventions cost $80 per ton of CO2 abated on average (Bistline et al.,
2023). A conventional SCC value based on local temperature of $178 per ton implies
5

that these policies are cost-effective only if governments internalize benefits to the entire
world, as captured by the SCC. However, a government that only internalizes domestic
benefits values decarbonization using a Domestic Cost of Carbon (DCC). The DCC is
alwayslowerthantheSCCbecausedamagestoasinglecountryarelowerthanataglobal
scale. Underconventionalestimates,theDCCoftheUnitedStatesis$36perton,making
unilateral emissions reduction prohibitively expensive. Under our new estimates, the
DCC of the United States becomes $273 per ton and thus exceeds policy costs. In that
case,unilateraldecarbonizationpolicyiscost-effectivefortheUnitedStates.
Related literature. Our paper contributes to an influential literature measuring eco-
nomicdamagesfromclimatechangebasedonhistoricaltemperaturevariation,surveyed
in Burke et al. (2023) and Moore et al. (2024). The conventional approach estimates the
effect of small, short-run local temperature shocks over time within a spatial area on eco-
nomic outcomes in a panel structure to achieve credible identification (Dell et al., 2012;
Dell et al., 2014; Burke et al., 2015; Newell etal., 2021; Kahn et al., 2021; Nath et al., 2022).
Consistentlyacrossallthesestudies,medium-termeffectsrangefrom0.5%to2%ofGDP,
on average, and rely exclusively on climatic variation within countries or smaller geo-
graphic units. Our paper takes a fundamentally different approach: we directly exploit
aggregate time-series variation in global mean temperature instead of relying on within-
countryclimaticvariationthatnetsoutcommoneffectsofglobaltemperature.
Local temperature estimates can lead to large long-run economic effects if one as-
sumes that medium-run growth impacts persist forever (Dell et al., 2012; Burke et al.,
2015; Burke et al., 2023, “growth effects”). Our treatment of temperature trends and per-
sistence builds on Nath et al. (2022), who clarify how to translate short-run local weather
effectstolong-runcounterfactualsbydistinguishingbetweenthepolarcasesof“levelef-
fects” and “growth effects”. We purposefully do not impose permanent growth effects
and instead use the degree of persistence implied by the data. If we did impose growth
effects,globaltemperatureimpactswouldbeevenlarger.
Perhaps surprisingly, few studies have explored time-series variation in temperature.
Bansal and Ochoa (2011) find that a 1°C global temperature increase reduces GDP by
1% contemporaneously. We show that the persistence of the GDP response is crucial: the
peak effect is an order of magnitude larger than this contemporaneous impact. Berg et
al. (2023) analyze the effects of global and idiosyncratic temperature shocks on GDP dis-
persion across countries. We directly estimate the aggregate impact of global temperature,
6

which is more precisely estimated than individual country-level responses. In contem-
porarywork,Neal(2023)alsoemphasizestheroleofglobaltemperature,suggestingthat
correlated local temperature and spillover effects across countries may lead to underes-
timate the effect of local temperature (see also Zappalà, 2023). We show that spillovers
fallshortofrationalizingthegapbetweenglobalandlocaltemperatureimpacts. Instead,
we highlight the distinct relationship between global temperature and extreme climatic
events. Relativetothesepapers,wealsouseourmacroeconomicestimatesinastructural
modeltoevaluatewelfareandtheSCC.
As such, our paper relates to the literature studying the economic impact of climatic
phenomena such as storms, heatwaves or El Niño (Barro, 2006; Deschênes and Green-
stone, 2011; Hsiang et al., 2011; Deryugina, 2013; Hsiang and Jina, 2014; Bilal and Rossi-
Hansberg, 2023; Phan and Schwartzman, 2024; Tran and Wilson, 2023; Callahan and
Mankin, 2023; Dingel et al., 2023). Kotz et al. (2024) show that local extreme tempera-
ture and precipitation increase damages beyond local average temperature. We evaluate
the impact of global temperature directly and provide new evidence on the relationship
betweenglobaltemperatureandawiderangeofextremeclimaticevents.
Our paper also connects to the literature using Integrated Assessment Models sur-
veyed in Nordhaus (2013). We take a “top-down” approach and directly estimate and
matchthemacroeconomicimpactofglobaltemperature. OuranalysissuggeststhatInte-
grated Assessment Models have historically delivered small costs of climate change not
so much because they relied on incomplete foundations, but instead because they were
calibrated to economic damages that did not represent the full impact of climate change
(Nordhaus,2013;Sternetal.,2022).
More recently, “bottom-up” models featuring rich regional heterogeneity, migration
(Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg, 2015; Desmet et al., 2021; Cruz and Rossi-Hansberg, 2023;
Rudiketal.,2022;Conteetal.,2022)andcapitalinvestment(KrusellandSmith,2022;Bilal
and Rossi-Hansberg, 2023) match micro-level estimates and aggregate using the model.
Our“top-down”approachismoreholisticinthatwedonotneedtospecifyandestimate
allchannelsandgeneralequilibriumeffectsmappingglobaltemperaturetodamages,but
remainsnecessarilylimitedinassessingdistributionalandadaptationeffects.
Infact,bothourglobaltemperatureapproachandtheconventionallocaltemperature
approach rely on moderate short-run temperature variation for identification. We thus
remain as close as possible to the local temperature approach in our ability to capture
7

adaption. To the extent that adaptation may be more pronounced in response to large
long-run temperature changes, our results represent an upper bound on realized eco-
nomic damages from slowly unfolding climate change. Although assessing the role of
adaptation is beyond the scope of this paper, existing evidence suggests a limited role
for adaptation even for the United States (Burke and Emerick, 2016; Moscona and Sastry,
2022; Bilal and Rossi-Hansberg, 2023), in line with the stability of our estimates across
time periods. Should there be an unprecedented uptake in adaptation in the future, our
numberswouldstillrepresentsociety’swillingnesstopayforsuchinvestments.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and esti-
mates the macroeconomic effects of temperature shocks using our time-series approach.
Section 3 compares the effects of global and local temperature. Section 4 introduces our
dynamicmodelanddescribesourstructuralestimationapproach. Section5evaluatesthe
welfareimplicationsofclimatechange. Section6concludes.
2 Global Temperature and Economic Growth
2.1 A Novel Climate-Economy Dataset
Our starting point is to construct a dataset covering 173 countries over the last 120 years
to study the effects of temperature on the economy. We use world aggregates from this
datasetinthissection,andcountry-leveloutcomesinSection3below.
We obtain temperature data from the Berkeley Earth Surface Temperature Database.
It provides temperature anomaly data at a spatial resolution of 1 ◦ ×1 ◦ of latitude and
longitude. Based onthis griddeddata, we constructpopulation- and area-weightedtem-
perature measures at the country level. We also construct area-weighted measures of
global temperature, which includes land and ocean surface air temperature. Reassur-
ingly, our measure correlates virtually perfectly with global temperature data from the
NationalOceanicandAtmosphericAdministration(NOAA).
We rely on data from ISIMIP for information on extreme weather events. ISIMIP pro-
videsglobal,high-frequencydatasetsthatrecordmultipleatmosphericvariablesoverthe
20th and early 21st centuries. We use ISIMIP’s observed climate dataset. It contains daily
reanalysis measures of temperature, wind speed and precipitation, spanning the period
1901-2019 at the 0.5 ◦ ×0.5 ◦ resolution. We compute exposure indices to extreme weather
byrecording thefraction ofdays within acountry andyear thatexperiencea weatherre-
8

alizationaboveorbelowafixedpercentileofthedailyweatherdistributionin1950-1980.
SeeAppendixA.1fordetails.
WecombineourclimatedatasetwitheconomicinformationonGDP,population,con-
sumption, investment, and productivity. We obtain a high-quality dataset for a compre-
hensiveselectionofcountriesaroundtheworldfromthePennWorldTables. Wealsorely
on data from the World Bank as an alternative. Given that both datasets only go back
to the 1950s or 1960s, we also include data from the Jordà-Schularick-Taylor Macrohis-
tory database, which features high-quality economic data for a selection of high-income
countriesstartinginthelate19thcentury.
2.2 Global Temperature Shocks
Figure 1 displays the evolution of global average temperature and world real GDP per
capita since the post-World War II era in our dataset. In the late-1950s to the mid-1970s,
globalaveragetemperatureremainedrelativelystableataround14°C.However,fromthe
late 1970s onward, global average temperature began to steadily rise again. At the same
time,weobserverelativelystableeconomicgrowthovertheentiresample.
Figure1: GlobalAverageTemperatureandOutputSince1960
)C°(
erutarepmeT
5.51
0.51
5.41
0.41
Global average temperature
1960 1980 2000 2020
Year
)DSU(
atipac
rep
PDG
laeR
000,21
000,01
000,8
000,6
000,4
World real GDP
1960 1980 2000 2020
Year
Notes: Evolutionofglobalaveragetemperature,computedbasedonBerkeleyEarthtemperatureanomaly
dataandthecorrespondingclimatology, intheleftpanel, andtheevolutionofworldrealGDPpercapita
(in2017USD)computedbasedonPWTdataintherightpanel.
The trending behavior of the two series in Figure 1 complicates the identification of
the economic effects of temperature increases. A simple regression of global GDP on
temperature will yield a spuriously positive association between the two variables, as
9

economic growth is associated with higher greenhouse gas emissions which eventually
translateintohighertemperature. Therefore,wedonotfocusontheleveloftemperature
as the treatment in our projections, but instead focus on so-called temperature shocks. We
define such shocks as possibly persistent deviations from the long-run trend in global
meantemperature.
What drives these variations in temperature around the trend? The geoscience litera-
tureindicatestwotypesofcauses. First,externalcausessuchassolarcyclesandvolcanic
eruptions lead to short-run fluctuations in the Earth’s mean temperature. Solar cycles
have a typical period of 10 years and can warm the Earth by as much as 0.1°C (National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 2009). Volcanic eruptions have shorter-lived
cooling effects of up to 2 years due to sulphuric aerosols that increase albedo (National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 2005). Second, internal climate variability—
interactions within the climatic system itself that lead to irregularly recurring events—
also affects temperatures. For instance, the El Niño-La Niña cycle varies unpredictably
between 2 to 7 years and substantially affects global mean temperatures and weather ex-
tremes(Kaufmannetal.,2006;NationalOceanicandAtmosphericAdministration,2023).
How to isolate the trend and transient components of temperature? To estimate the
effectsoftemperatureonfutureeconomicoutcomes,itiscriticaltopreservethecausality
ofthedatainatime-seriessense: wecannotrelyonfuturevaluesoftemperaturetoiden-
tifythetrendinthecurrentperiod. Inaddition,thephysicalpropertiesofnaturalclimate
variabilitysuggesttoallowforsomewhatpersistentdeviationsfromtrend.
Oneapproachthatsatisfiesourneedsalongboththesedimensionsisthemethodpro-
posed by Hamilton (2018). The idea is to regress temperature h periods out on some
of its lags as of period t and construct the temperature shock as the innovation in this
regression:
T(cid:100)
t
s
+
hoc
h
k = T
t+h
−(
(cid:98)
α+β(cid:98)
1
T
t
+...+β(cid:98)p T
t−p+1
), (1)
where β(cid:98) denotes the coefficient estimates of the regression of temperature on its lag i
i
and α is the estimated intercept. This exercise amounts to isolating shocks that persist
(cid:98)
typicallyforhperiods. Selectingthehorizonhisofcourseanimportantchoice. Motivated
by the fact that the climatic events that we consider can last for up to several years, we
select a horizon of h = 2 and set the number of lags to p = 2 in our main specification.
As we show in Section 2.4 below and in Appendix A.14, varying these values leaves our
results essentially unchanged. In particular, Appendix A.14.1 reproduces all our main
10

Figure2: GlobalTemperatureShock
)C°(
kcohs
erutarepmeT
4.0
2.0
0.0
2.0-
4.0-
1960 1980 2000 2020
Year
Notes: Globaltemperatureshocks,computedasinHamilton(2018)with(h =2, p =2),since1960.
analyses under a one-step ahead forecast error h = 1 as commonly used in the literature
andfindsvirtuallyidenticalresults.
Figure 2 shows the resulting global temperature shocks over our sample of interest.
As expected, the temperature shocks fluctuate around zero with an almost equal num-
ber of positive and negative shocks. The largest temperature shocks in our sample are
around0.3°C.FigureA.2inAppendixA.2indicatesthattheseriesisalsoweaklyautocor-
related, because we allow for relatively persistent deviations from the long-run temper-
ature trend. In our empirical specification, we therefore control for lagged temperature
shocks as well. Otherwise, serial correlation may bias the estimated impacts when not
properlyaccountedfor(Nathetal.,2022).
2.3 The Effect of Temperature Shocks in the Time Series
The economic effects of temperature shocks may take time to materialize. Therefore, we
focus on the dynamic effects of temperature shocks up to 10 years out. We evaluate di-
rectlythesemedium-runeffectsoftemperaturewithoutextrapolatingshort-termtemper-
ature impacts. Of course, we would ideally trace out even longer-run effects, but our
limitedsampleperiodpreventsusfromdoingsoconsistently.
We estimate the dynamic causal effects to global temperature shocks using local pro-
jections as in Jordà (2005). This approach involves estimating the following series of re-
11

gressions,oneforeachhorizon h = 0,...,10:
y −y = α +θ Tshock+x ′ β +ε , (2)
t+h t−1 h h t t h t+h
where y is the outcome variable of interest, Tshock is the temperature shock and θ is the
t t h
dynamic causal effect of interest at horizon h. We refer to the latter as the impulse re-
sponse function. x is a vector of controls and ε is a potentially serially correlated error
t t
term. Our main outcome variable of interest is (log) world real GDP per capita. Because
we are using the cumulative growth rate as the dependent variable, we are estimating a
possiblypersistentleveleffect. Theestimationsampleis1960-2019.1
We use local projections in our main analysis because they tend to be robust at longer
horizons (Montiel Olea et al., 2024). Compared to Vector Autoregressions (VARs) or dis-
tributed lag models, local projections directly estimate the effects of interest rather than
extrapolatingfromthefirstfewautocovariancesandallowformoreflexiblecontrols. Yet,
weobtainsimilarresultsunderalternativeestimationmodelsinAppendixA.5.
To account for the serial correlation in GDP growth and temperature shocks, we in-
clude2lagsofrealGDPgrowthpercapitaandoftheglobaltemperatureshock. Tocontrol
for the global business cycle more comprehensively, we also include 2 lags of global oil
price changes and the U.S. treasury yield. Finally, we flexibly control for large economic
shocks, such as the large oil shocks in the 1970s or the Great Recession, using a set of
dummy variables.2 We compute the confidence bands using the lag-augmentation ap-
proach(MontielOleaandPlagborg-Moller,2021).3
Figure 3 shows the impulse responses of global temperature and world real GDP per
capita to a global temperature shock of 1°C. The solid black lines are the point estimates
and the shaded areas are 90 and 95% confidence bands, respectively. Panel (a) indicates
that global temperature increases by 1°C on impact. The effect of a global temperature
shock on global temperature turns out to be highly persistent: after 10 years global tem-
1Leveraging that temperature data is available for a longer period than GDP data, we estimate the
temperatureshockbasedonthislongersample(1950-2022)tomitigatetheinfluencefromobservationsat
thebeginningandtheendofthesample.
2Our definition of global recession dates follows the World Bank (Kose et al., 2020). Specifically, we
focus on the following episodes: 1973-1975, 1979-1983, 1990-1992, 2007-2009, and 2011-2012. To allow for
potentialpersistenteffectsofrecessions,wealsoinclude2lagsoftheglobalrecessionindicatorvariable.
3AsinNathetal.(2022),wedonotaccountforestimationuncertaintyintheglobaltemperatureshock
inourbaselinespecification. However,wealternativelyconductinferenceusingbootstrappingtechniques,
and taking estimation uncertainty into account yields very similar inference. See Appendix A.3 for more
details.
12

Figure3: TheEffectofGlobalTemperatureShocksonWorldOutput
(a)Globaltemperature
C°
1
5.
0
(b)WorldrealGDP
Global temperature
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
01
0
01-
02-
World real GDP
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
Notes: ImpulseresponsesofglobalmeantemperatureandworldrealGDPpercapitatoaglobaltemper-
ature shock, estimated based on (2) on the period 1960-2019. Solid line: point estimate. Dark and light
shadedareas: 90and95%confidencebands.
peratureisstillelevatedbyabout0.5°C.
The persistent rise in global temperature leads to large economic effects. Panel (b)
shows that, on impact, world GDP falls by about 2.5%. However, the effect builds up
over time. After six years, world GDP falls by 12%, with effects that persist up to eight
years out. Our estimate is of similar magnitude to growth impacts that typically occur
afterseverefinancialcrises(CerraandSaxena,2008;ReinhartandRogoff,2009).
The gradual decline in world GDP reflects not only the direct impact of the initial
temperature shock, but also the subsequent effects of persistently elevated temperature
that accumulate over time. Figure A.5 in Appendix A.4 shows that these accumulated
effectsofpersistentlyelevatedtemperatureaccountforasubstantialpartofthepeakeffect
and of its timing. We construct a counterfactual path of output that would correspond to
a one-time fully transitory global temperature change using the method in Sims (1986).
Thepeakimpactisthen5%instead,andoccursalreadyfouryearsaftertheshock.
Ofcourse,a1°Ctemperatureshockisalargeshockthatdoesnotoccurdirectlyinour
historical sample: we observe smaller shocks in practice. Our estimate for a 1°C shock
scales up the linear effect of these smaller shocks. In effect, we abstract from potential
non-linearities. Among the relatively small shocks we observe, we do not find much
evidence for non-linearities. Figure A.9 in Appendix A.8 reports comparable impacts of
small, larger, or only positive shocks. Of course, these results do not imply that non-
linearitiesdonotmatterforlargershocksthathavenotyetmaterialized. However,inthe
13

presence of potential future tipping points, one may expect larger effects than predicted
byourlinearmodel.
2.4 Robustness
Thetime-seriesnatureofouridentifyingvariationrequirescareininterpretingthesecon-
clusions. Wenowdemonstratethatourmainestimateisrobusttoaccountingforvarious
identificationconcerns.
Omitted variable bias. Global temperature innovations may happen to be correlated
withtheglobaleconomiccycleovertime. Forinstance,ifasevereElNiñoeventincreases
global temperature at the same time that a global recession occurs for unrelated reasons,
wemaymistakenlyattributeadverseeconomicimpactstoclimaticvariations.
To account for this possibility, we already include a rich set controls of the world eco-
nomicperformanceinourmainspecificationinequation(2). InFigure4(a),weshowthat
our results hold regardless of the particular set of macroeconomic controls. We consider
two specifications based on more parsimonious sets of controls: a specification that does
not include oil prices and the treasury yield and a specification that also excludes the
globalrecessiondates. Reassuringly,thepointestimatesareverysimilaracrossspecifica-
tions, suggesting that global temperature shocks and economic shocks are largely unre-
lated in our sample. However, the additional controls help reduce sampling uncertainty
andleadtomorepreciseestimates.
We confirm that spuriously correlated economic shocks are unlikely to drive our re-
sults by examining how each year in the sample affects our estimates. For all years t,
Figure 4(b) plots the change in GDP 5 years later at t+5 against the temperature shocks
attime t afterresidualizingbothfromoursetofcontrols. Thenegativerelationshipturns
out to be a robust one and is not driven by a specific set of outliers. Figure A.8 in Ap-
pendixA.6displaysasystematicjackknifeexerciseinwhichwecensoroneyearatatime
andfindthatourestimatesarenotdrivenbyspecificyears. Overall,theseresultsindicate
that our estimates are unlikely to be driven by economic shocks spuriously correlated to
temperatureshocks.
Reversecausality. Changesineconomicactivitymayaffectshort-runvariationsintem-
perature: a decline in economic activity lowers emissions and temperature, hence in-
creasesoutputgoingforward,andpotentiallybiasesourestimates.
14

Figure4: SensitivityoftheEffectofGlobalTemperatureShocksintheTimeSeries
(a)Sensitivitywithrespecttocontrols
tnecreP
01
0
01-
02-
(b)Scatterplotath = 5
Baseline
Recession dates only 1968
No additional controls 1964 2003
19822011 19189563 1199682730021969
1976 200 2 1 0 0 1 9 1 0 9 8 9 8 8 4 1 7 1 2 6 1 21 9 1 9 0 92 09 6 1 7 0 190 09 5 9 4 7 9 2 1 90 46 1 9 6 0 9 19 2 2 6 1 7 7 02 2 5 0 1 6 9 1 7 9 1 3 7 9 02 91 0 59 02 9 90 12 0 2 01 5 0 19 1 39 0 7 1981 1998
1990 199419931989 2014191891889087
1979
1977
1978
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
PDG laeR
01
5
0
5-
01-
-.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3
Temperature shock
(c)Accountingforreversecausality
tnecreP
01
0
01-
02-
(d)Constructionoftemperatureshock
No correction
CO2 correction
CO2 & CH4 correction
CO2 & CH4 & SO2 correction
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
01
0
01-
02-
Baseline
One-step ahead FE
One-sided HP-filter
One-step LP
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
Notes: ImpulseresponsesofworldGDPpercapitatoaglobaltemperatureshock,estimatedfrom(2)over
theperiod1960-2019. Panel(a): sensitivitywithrespecttocontrolsincluded: baseline(twolagsoftemper-
ature shocks, world real GDP growth, oil prices, one-year US treasury yield and global recession dates);
specification without oil prices and treasury yield; specification which only controls for two lags of the
temperatureshockandGDPgrowth. Panel(b): scatterplotoftemperatureshocksagainstthecumulative
changeinrealGDP5yearsout,bothafterresidualizingoursetofcontrols. Panel(c): GDPresponseafter
adjusting for reverse causality. Panel (d): sensitivity with respect to the construction of the temperature
shock: baselinewithh =2;one-stepaheadforecasterrorh =1;one-sidedHPfilter;one-stepLPestimation
with4lagsofglobaltemperaturechanges. Lines: pointestimate. Darkandlightshadedareas: baseline90
and95%confidencebands.
There are two reasons why reverse causality due to greenhouse gases is unlikely to
substantiallyaffectourinterpretation. First,suchreversecausalityconcernstypicallylead
us to underestimate the effect of temperature on economic output. As temperature rises
and economic activity initially declines, the resulting fall in greenhouse gas emissions
implies lower future temperatures and thus higher future output. Thus, true damages
15

wouldbeevenlargerthanourestimates.
Second, annual fluctuations in emissions imply negligible temperature variations rel-
ative to the typical temperature shocks that we exploit. For instance, typical year-to-year
fluctuations in CO2 emissions are of the order of 2 gigatons. After accounting for oceanic
andbiosphereabsorption,theseannualfluctuationstranslateinto1gigatonofatmospheric
CO2. Thismagnitudecorrespondsto0.15partpermillion(ppm)inatmosphericCO2con-
centration. CurrentCO2atmosphericconcentrationisjustabove400ppm. Givenaclimate
sensitivitybetween2and4,year-to-yearfluctuationsinemissionsthusimplyyear-to-year
fluctuations in temperature of about 0.0005°C. This is an order of magnitude lower than
naturalclimatevariabilitywhichisoftheorderof0.1°C.
Aerosolemissionscanalsoleadtoreversecausality,forinstanceduetosulfurdioxide
(SO2). Aerosols have the opposite effect of greenhouse gases and reduce global temper-
ature by reflecting incoming sunlight. Aerosols are shorter-lived than greenhouse gases
in the atmosphere, which may amplify or dampen reverse causality concerns relative to
greenhousegasesdependingonthehorizonofinterest.
Two exercises verify that reverse causality is unlikely to affect our results. First, we
test whether our temperature shocks are forecastable by past macro-financial variables
with a series of Granger-causality tests in Table A.2, Appendix A.2. We find no evidence
that global temperature shocks are forecastable, consistently with the substantial lag and
smallsensitivitybetweenemissionsandtemperaturechanges.
Second, we explicitly account for the feedback between output and temperature
through emissions. We consider the two most important greenhouse gases: carbon diox-
ide (CO2) and methane (CH4). We also include the main source of aerosol emissions:
sulfur dioxide (SO2). We use standard estimates of the emissions-to-GDP elasticity and
leading estimates of the dynamic sensitivity of temperature to an emissions impulse to
constructouradjustment. WeprovidemoredetailsinAppendixA.7. Figure4(c)confirms
thatexplicitlyadjustingforreversecausalityhasnomeaningfuleffectonourresults.
External validity and temperature variability. Different ways of constructing our tem-
peratureshocksorexcludingspecificsourcesofglobaltemperaturevariationmayleadto
differentresults. Weaddressthisconcernwithaseriesofexercises.
We show that our results hold across a variety of definitions of temperature shocks.
In our baseline specification, we measure temperature shocks using the Hamilton (2018)
filterwithahorizon h = 2. InFigure4(d),weshowthatconstructingtemperatureshocks
16

as one-step ahead forecast errors h = 1 following previous work (see e.g. Bansal and
Ochoa, 2011; Nath et al., 2022) or using a one-sided HP filter produces similar results.
In addition, Appendix A.14.1 reproduces all our main analyses under a one-step ahead
forecasterror h = 1andfindsvirtuallyidenticalresults.
We also show that our results are virtually unchanged when we directly estimate
the effects of temperature on world GDP without highlighting the identifying variation
throughglobaltemperatureshocks. Inthatcase,insteadofestimatingtemperatureshocks
inafirststepbyprojectingtemperatureonitslags,andthenprojectingworldrealGDPon
temperature shocks in a second step, we directly project world real GDP on temperature
with enough lags of temperature and GDP. Both approaches are numerically equivalent
when we construct the shocks as one-step ahead forecast errors with the same controls
(seeAppendixA.5formoredetails).
We include both positive and negative temperature shocks in our main analysis to
maximize precision. To assess the effects of global warming, focusing on positive shocks
maybemoredirectlyinformative. FigureA.9inAppendixA.8showsthatpositiveshocks
alonehaveasimilar—ifanything,slightlylarger—impacttoourbaselineanalysis.
In addition, our results do not depend on specific sources of global temperature vari-
ation. We re-evaluate our results after netting out temperature variation generated by El
NiñobycontrollingforanENSOindexinourmainspecification. Theresultsareshownin
Figure A.3 in Appendix A.2. The responses are close to our baseline estimates. Similarly,
controllingforvolcaniceruptionsalsoyieldsvirtuallyunchangedresults. Theseexercises
indicate that our main results capture a broad effect of global temperature on economic
activitythatisnotspecifictoparticularsourcesoftemperaturevariation.
Together, these robustness exercises corroborate our interpretation that global tem-
peratureshocksaredrivenbyvariousexternalcausesandinternalclimatevariabilityand
have a large causal effect on world GDP. We expand more flexibly on these robustness
checks in the next section, where we study the effects of global temperature shocks in a
panelofcountries.
3 Temperature Shocks in the Panel of Countries
SofarwehaveevaluatedtheimpactofglobaltemperatureshocksdirectlyonworldGDP.
Wenowexploitcountry-leveldataonGDPtoachievethreedistinctgoals. Ourfirstgoalin
17

Section3.1istoexploittheadditionalstatisticalpowerinthepaneltofurthercorroborate
our results when controlling for possibly confounding trends at the country level and
varying the span of our sample period. Our second goal in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 is to
contrasttheimpactofglobaltemperaturewithexistingworkthathasfocusedoncountry-
level temperature. Our third goal in Section 3.4 is to unpack the margins through which
GDPdeclinesandtheheterogeneityincountry-levelresponses.
3.1 Global Temperature Shocks in the Panel
Toestimatethedynamiccausaleffectsoftemperatureshocksinthepanel,weemploythe
panel local projections approach in Jordà et al. (2020). In this section, we still estimate
the effect of global temperature shocks, now averaged across 173 countries. However,
the panel approach allows us to account for unobserved, time-invariant country char-
acteristics using country fixed effects. We can also control for past GDP growth at the
country level and regional trends. Specifically, we estimate the following series of panel
regressionsforhorizons h = 0,...,10:
y −y = α +θ Tshock+x ′ β +x ′ γ +ε , (3)
i,t+h i,t−1 i,h h t t h i,t h i,t+h
where y is the outcome variable of interest for country i in year t, Tshock is the global
i,t t
temperature shock and θ is the dynamic causal effect of interest at horizon h. x is a
h t
vector of global controls, x is a vector of country-specific controls and ε is an error
i,t i,t
term. In our baseline specification, we use the same set of global controls as before, and
in addition control for two lags of country-level GDP growth and region-specific time
trends. Weassessthesensitivitywithrespecttothesecontrolsinfurthersensitivitychecks
below. Our main outcome variable of interest is country-level log real GDP per capita.
Oursampleisanunbalancedpanelspanning1960-2019.
Because the temperature shock Tshock does not vary by country, the error term is po-
t
tentially serially and cross-sectionally correlated. For inference, we rely on Driscoll and
Kraay(1998)standarderrorsthatarerobusttocross-sectionalandserialdependence.4
By design, our specification is close to the specifications commonly used in the panel
4Ourresultsarerobusttousingtwo-wayclusteredstandarderrorsbycountryandyear,orusingboot-
strappingtechniquesforinference. Infact, toconstructtheconfidencebandsforourestimatedstructural
damage functions in Section 4.3, we rely on the distribution estimated using a Wild bootstrap. See Ap-
pendixA.3formoredetails.
18

literatureontheeconomiceffectsoflocaltemperatureshocks(e.g.Delletal.,2012;Burke
et al., 2015; Nath et al., 2022). Crucially however, the temperature shock Tshock does not
t
varybycountryinourcase. Asaresult,wecannotcontrolfortimefixedeffectsasiscom-
mon when shocks are also country-specific. Instead, we include the same global control
variablesasinourtime-seriesspecification(2).
Figure 5(a) shows the impulse responses to a global temperature shock, estimated
in the panel of countries. Consistently with our aggregate time-series evidence, global
temperature shocks lead to a substantial fall in real GDP per capita that exceeds 10% at
peak, is statistically significant at the 5% level in years 3 to 8, and persists up to 10 years
out. Thiseffectisclosetoourtimeseriesanalysis,indicatingthatourresultsarerobustto
accountingforunobservedfixedcountrycharacteristics.
Theincreasedstatisticalpowerinthepanelallowsusconductanumberofadditional
sensitivity checks. Panel (b) evaluates whether our results depend on the sample period.
We obtain similar results on a sample that starts in 1985 after the large oil shocks of the
1970s or on a sample ending before the 2008 Great Recession. We also consider a much
longer sample starting in 1900. For this analysis, we rely on the 18 advanced economies
in the Jordà-Schularick-Taylor Macrohistory Database for which we have consistent real
GDP data. The results are again similar up to statistical precision. The stability of our
estimatesacrosstimeperiodssuggestsalackofadaptationtotemperatureshocks,atleast
historically.
Oursecondsensitivitycheckconcernstheselectionofcontrols,toaccountforpotential
confounding effects. We show that a specification excluding region-specific time trends
producesverysimilarresults. Toaccountforpotentiallystronglypersistentimpactsofthe
global economic cycle, we consider specifications where we control for 4 lags of all our
global controls, and a specification where we control for 10 lags of world and country-
GDP growth. Figure 5(c) shows that our estimates turn out to be virtually invariant to
thesetofcontrols. InAppendixA.10,wefurtherestablishthatunobservedglobalshocks
are not driving our results by exploiting an intermediate level of spatial aggregation of
temperature shocks. The results from this specification do again not change much when
wecontrolfortimefixedeffects.
Ourthirdsensitivitycheckinvestigateswhetherourresultsmaybeduetopre-trends.
Although Table A.2 in Appendix A.2 already suggests that Granger causality is unlikely
tobeaconcern,Figure5(d)plotsourmainestimatetogetherwithestimates6yearsprior
19

Figure5: TheAverageEffectofGlobalTemperatureShocksandSensitivity
(a)Averageeffectinthepanel
tnecreP
01
0
01-
02-
(b)Alternativesampleperiods
Average effect in panel
Aggregate effect from time series
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
01
0
01-
02-
Baseline (1960-2019)
Short sample (1985-2019)
Long sample (1900-2019)
Excluding GFC (1960-2007)
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
(c)Additionalcontrols
tnecreP
01
0
01-
02-
(d)Pre-trends
Baseline
No region-specific trends
4 lags of global controls
10 lags of world and country-GDP growth
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
01
0
01-
02-
-6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
Notes:ImpulseresponsesofrealGDPpercapitatoaglobaltemperatureshockestimatedinthepanelusing
(3) over the period 1960-2019. Panel (a): baseline panel specification together with time-series response.
Panel (b): resultsunder shorter (1985-2019), excluding the Great Recession (1960-2007), and longer (1900-
2019, with restricted set of countries) samples. Figure A.17 in Appendix A.14 reports individual impulse
responsefunctionsforeachsampletogetherwithconfidenceintervals. Panel(c): sensitivitywithrespectto
controls: baseline(twolagsoftemperatureshocks,country-levelGDP,growth,worldrealGDPgrowth,oil
prices,one-yearUStreasuryyield,globalrecessiondatesandsubregion-specifictimetrends);specification
excluding subregion-specific time trends; specification with expanded set of global controls (four lags);
specificationthatcontrolsfor10lagsofworldandcountry-GDPgrowth. Panel(d): baselineresponsewith
pre-trends. Lines: point estimate. Dark and light shaded areas: 90 and 95% confidence bands based on
DriscollandKraay(1998)errors.
to the global temperature shock. The effect in the three years before the shock is zero
by construction since we control for two lags of GDP growth. We do not detect any
statisticallysignificantnoreconomicallymeaningfuleffectupto6yearspriortotheshock.
Finally, we show in Appendix A.14 that our results are robust with respect a range of
alternativechoices. Wefind verysimilar resultswith GDPdata fromthe WorldDevelop-
20

Figure6: LocalandGlobalTemperatureShocks
)C°(
kcohs
erutarepmeT
0.1
5.0
0.0
5.0-
0.1-
United States
Local temperature shock
Global temperature shock
1960 1980 2000 2020
Year
)C°(
kcohs
erutarepmeT
0.1
5.0
0.0
5.0-
0.1-
South Africa
1960 1980 2000 2020
Year
Notes: Local temperature shocks for the United States (left panel) and South Africa (right panel) in red
togetherwiththeglobaltemperatureshocksasthebluedashedline. Alltheshocksarecomputedbasedon
theHamilton(2018)approachwith(h = 2, p = 2). Localshockscomputedbasedonpopulation-weighted
country-leveltemperaturedata.
mentIndicators,withtemperaturedatafromNOAAandNASA,withthedatasetsinDell
et al. (2012) and Burke et al. (2015), and with different numbers of lags included in our
local projections. Overall, these results confirm the substantial and persistent negative
effectofglobaltemperatureshocksonrealGDP.
3.2 Global vs. Local Temperature
Howdotheseeffectscomparetolocaltemperatureshocks? Conventionalestimatesimply
thata1°CriseinlocaltemperaturereducesGDPatmostby1-2%inthemediumrun(Dell
etal.,2012;Burkeetal.,2015;Nathetal.,2022). Toensurethatourfindingsarenotdriven
by differences in econometric specifications or data choices, we reproduce the effects of
local temperature shocks in our empirical framework. We measure local temperature
shocks using the Hamilton (2018) filter, as we do in Section 2.2 for global temperature,
butnowbasedonpopulation-weightedcountry-leveltemperaturedata.
Figure 6 shows local temperature shocks for the United States and South Africa over
our sample from 1960, as two illustrative examples. The standard deviation of local tem-
peratureshocksisaboutthreetimeslargerthanthatofglobaltemperatureshocks. While
localandglobalshockshaveacorrelationof0.31,theyfrequentlymoveindifferentdirec-
tions. Thus,localshocksdonotalwayscorrespondtoglobalshocksandvice-versa.
21

To estimate the responses to local shocks, we rely on our panel specification (3), with
the critical difference that the temperature shock is a country-specific temperature shock
Tshock. In this first specification, we do not include time fixed effects to maximize compa-
i,t
rabilitywith(3). However,wealsoconsidertwoalternativespecifications:
y −y = α +θglobalTshock+θlocalTshock+x ′ β +x ′ γ +ε (4a)
i,t+h i,t−1 i,h h t h i,t t h i,t h i,t+h
y −y = α +δ +θ Tshock+x ′ γ +ε (4b)
i,t+h i,t−1 i,h t,h h i,t i,t h i,t+h
In specification (4a), we estimate the impacts of global and local temperature shocks
jointly. This provides a straightforward way to assess whether the two responses are sta-
tistically significant from each other. Specification (4b) includes time fixed effects, which
allows us to flexibly control for any unobserved common shocks. In that case, the time
fixedeffectsabsorbtheglobaltemperatureshocksandanyotherglobalcontrols.
Figure 7(a) shows the estimated impulse responses to a local temperature shock of
1°C, together with the responses to a global temperature shock from Section 3.1. Local
temperatureshocksleadtoafallinrealGDP,eventhoughtheresponseisnotstatistically
significant at the 5% level. On impact, the effect stands at -0.5% and reaches -1% after 4
years. These point estimates and associated uncertainty are similar to previous findings
in Dell et al. (2012), Burke et al. (2015), and Nath et al. (2022) when aggregated across all
countries, and of course mask a substantial degree of underlying heterogeneity. Control-
ling for time fixed effects does not make much of a difference. If at all, the inclusion of
timefixedeffectsattenuatestheimpactsoflocaltemperaturesomewhat.
The comparison reveals that global temperature has much more pronounced impacts
on economic activity than local temperature. The estimated effects of global temperature
shocks are larger than of local temperature shocks by an order of magnitude, based on
the same empirical model (3) and the same sample period. This difference is not only
economically but also statistically significant. Panel (b) reveals that the responses of GDP
to global and local temperature shocks over our horizon of interest based on (4a) are
statisticallydifferentatthe5%levelinyears3to8.5
One possible explanation for the differential impact of global and local temperature
shocks is statistical: global temperature shocks may lead to a more pronounced increase
5Estimatingtheeffectofbothshockssimultaneouslydoesnotchangetheunivariateimpulseresponses
materially, reflecting that different variation identifies the impact of global and local temperature shocks.
SeeAppendixA.9fordetails.
22

Figure7: TheEffectofGlobalvs. LocalTemperatureShocks
(a)RealGDPresponses
tnecreP
01
0
01-
02-
(b)DifferenceinGDPresponses
Global temperature shock
Local temperature shock
Local temperature shock, time FE
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
01
0
01-
02-
Difference
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
(c)Localtemperatureresponses
C°
5.1
1
5.
0
5.-
(d)GDPresponses,samepersistence
Local temperature
Global temperature shock
Local temperature shock
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
01
0
01-
02-
Real GDP
Global temperature shock
Local temperature shock, same persistence
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
Notes: Impulse responses of GDP per capita, estimated over the period 1960-2019. Panel (a): solid lines:
GDP responses to global and local temperature shocks based on (3); dashed red: GDP response to local
temperature shock from model with time fixed effect, (4b). Panel (b): difference between GDP responses
toglobalandlocaltemperatureshocksbasedonjointmodel(4a). Panel(c): localtemperatureresponseto
temperatureshocks. Unweightedregression,implyingthatthetime0impactofglobaltemperatureisclose
to1°C.Whenarea-weighted,theglobaltemperaturetime0impactislargerthan1°C,aslandwarmsmore
thanoceans,seeFigureA.14inAppendixA.13. Panel(d): GDPresponsesimposingthepersistenceofthe
global temperature response on local temperature. Dark and light shaded areas: 90 and 95% confidence
bands.
in local temperature. Figure 7(c) shows the response of local temperature to a local and
a global temperature shock, respectively. On impact, both local and global temperature
shocksleadtoanincreaseinlocaltemperatureofabout1°C.Yet,theincreaseinlocaltem-
perature is somewhat more persistent after a global temperature shock. To account for
this difference in persistence, we construct a counterfactual local temperature shock, im-
posing the same internal persistence as for the global shock, using again the Sims (1986)
23

method. Figure 7(d) shows that the difference in persistence cannot account for the dif-
ferential impact of global and local temperature shocks. Imposing the same persistence
increasestheimpactsoflocaltemperaturesomewhat,butthecumulativeeffectsofglobal
temperatureshocksarestillsixtimeslarger.
Ouranalysisindicatesthatthekeydifferenceliesinthenatureoftheshockitselfrather
than in the set of global controls or time fixed effects: changing the set of controls or
fixedeffectsdoesnotaffectthelocaltemperatureresultsmeaningfully. Climaticvariation
within country or even smaller geographic units may help alleviate identification con-
cerns, but misses any global effects of climate change—itself a global phenomenon. By
contrast,ourapproachpurposefullystudiesthesecommoneffectsbyfocusingonclimatic
variationatthegloballevel.
3.3 Reconciling the Impacts of Global and Local Temperature
Why, then, does global temperature cause more economic harm than local temperature?
We consider two possible economic explanations. The first explanation is that global tem-
perature shocks are inherently different from local temperature shocks and capture po-
tentially damaging climatic implications that local temperature does not. The second
explanation is that local temperature is the true determinant of damages but compounds
througheconomicspilloversthatarehowevernettedoutinthepanelspecification.
Extreme Climatic Events. We start by investigating whether global temperature pre-
dictsmeaningfulshiftsinclimaticphenomena. Weaskhowtemperatureshockscorrelate
with the likelihood of extreme weather events: extreme temperature, drought, extreme
precipitation,and extremewindspeed. As detailedinSection 2.1,we defineanexposure
index for each of these events by counting the fraction of cell-days within each year and
country that exceed a given threshold. This exposure index can thus be interpreted as a
probability. We use the panel local projection specification (3) and denote by θX the im-
h
pact of a 1°C temperature shock on the exposure index of event X at horizon h. Figure 8
displaysourresults.
Localtemperatureshocksleadtoanincreaseintheshareofextremeheatanddrought
days. However, global temperature shocks lead to a substantially larger increase in these
extremes. Our extreme heat and drought indices have a baseline probability of 0.05 and
0.25 in 1950-1980, respectively. Thus, a 1°C global temperature shock correlates with a
five-fold rise in the frequency of extreme heat and a 15% increase of the frequency of
24

Figure8: ExtremeWeatherEventsandTemperature
(a)Extremeheat
3.
2.
1.
0
1.-
Extreme heat (b)Drought
Global temperature shock
Local temperature shock
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
60.
40.
20.
0
20.-
Drought
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
(c)Extremeprecipitation
10.
500.
0
500.-
Extreme precipitation (d)Extremewind
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
600.
400.
200.
0
200.-
Extreme wind
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
Notes: Impulse responses θX of extreme temperature, drought, extreme precipitation, and extreme wind
h
exposurestoglobalandlocaltemperatureshocks,estimatedbasedon(3)withtheexpandedsetofglobal
controls. Extremeweatherexposureindicesrecordtheshareofcell-daysinagivenyearandcountrywhere
temperature, precipitation, or wind speed are above or below a threshold. We define thresholds using
thedailyweatherdistributionin1950-1980. Temperature: above95th percentile. Drought: belowthe25th
percentile. Precipitation: abovethe99th percentile. Wind: abovethe99th percentile. Thoughnotnecessary
for our results, we smooth the precipitation and wind measures with a backward-looking (current and
previoustwoyears)movingaveragetoremovetheirinherentnoise. Solidlines: pointestimate. Darkand
lightshadedareas: 90and95%confidencebands.
drought, an order of magnitude more than for local temperature shocks. The contrast
is even starker for extreme precipitation and extreme wind speed: global temperature
shocks predict a large increase in their frequency, while local temperature shocks have
no significant effect. We construct the extreme precipitation and wind index to have a
baselineprobabilityof0.01in1950-1980. Thus,a1°Cglobaltemperatureshockcorrelates
withanincreaseofthefrequencyofextremeprecipitationofover50%andextremewind
ofabout40%.
25

These findings are consistent with the geoscience literature: wind speed and precip-
itation are outcomes of the global climate—through oceanic warming and atmospheric
humidity—rather than outcomes of local temperature distributions (Seneviratne et al.,
2016;Wartenburgeretal.,2017;Seneviratneetal.,2021;Domeisenetal.,2023). Giventhat
extreme climatic events are known to cause economic damage (Deschênes and Green-
stone,2011;HsiangandJina,2014;BilalandRossi-Hansberg,2023),thedifferentialcorre-
lationofglobalversuslocaltemperatureshocksonextremeclimaticeventsmayrational-
izethelargereconomiceffectsofglobaltemperatureshocks.
To gauge the quantitative importance of this channel, we start by estimating the im-
pact of local extreme events in a panel local projection specification similar to (3). We de-
note by ϕX the impact of extreme event X’s exposure index on GDP at horizon h. Figure
h
A.13inAppendixA.12revealsthattheseeventsareassociatedwithsubstantialeconomic
damages. Afive-foldriseinextremeheatexposureatthecountrylevellowersGDPby2%
at peak. A 15% rise in drought exposure lowers GDP by 1%. A 50% increase in extreme
precipitationlowersGDPby0.5%anda40%increaseinwindexposurelowersoutputby
0.4%.
Next, we aggregate the local impacts of extreme events. We interact the increase in
extreme event exposure following a global temperature shock θX from Figure 8 with the
h
GDPlossassociatedwiththeseextremeeventsfromFigureA.13inAppendixA.12. Todo
so,weadjusttheestimatesϕX tocorrespondtoaone-timefullytransitoryriseinexposure
h
usingagainthemethodinSims(1986). Thispersistenceadjustmenttransformstheinitial
estimates ϕX intonewestimates ψX. Inpractice,thisadjustmenthasminorconsequences
h h
because extreme events have low unconditional internal persistence. We then aggregate
theseimpactsaccordingto Θ = ∑ ∑h θXψX ,wherethesumoverXincludesthefour
h X t=0 t h−t
Θ
extreme events and local temperature. Thus, the aggregate impact now factors in the
h
persistentresponseofextremeeventstoaglobaltemperatureshock {θX} .
h h
Figure 9(a) displays our results. The rise in local temperature and extremes leads to a
significantly larger economic impact than for local temperature alone. The peak effect on
GDPisinexcessof6%andthecumulativeimpactisclosetotwothirdsofthecumulative
effect of a global temperature shock. This result indicates that global temperature has a
larger impact on economic activity than local temperature because the physical nature of
the shock is different: it captures the broader implications of warming and in particular
theriseindamagingextremeevents.
26

Figure9: TheRoleofOceanTemperatureandExtremeEvents
(a)Aggregationofextremeevents
tnecreP
01
0
01-
02-
(b)Oceanvs. landtemperatureshocks
Real GDP
Effect of global temperature
Aggregated effect from local impacts
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
01
0
01-
02-
03-
Ocean temperature shock
Land temperature shock
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
Notes: Panel (a): aggregated effect on GDP based on local temperature and extreme events impacts Θ
h
(dashed red) together with the impulse responses to a global temperature shock based on our baseline
empiricalmodel(3). Panel(b): impulseresponsesofGDPtoanoceantemperatureandalandtemperature
shock,estimatedjointlyusing(2). Darkandlightshadedareas: 90and95%confidencebands.
We confirm our transmission channel of global temperature shocks through extreme
events by considering ocean and land temperature. Since oceanic warming is critical for
the formation of some of our extreme events, we expect it to account for a large part of
our global temperature impacts. We jointly estimate the impact of ocean and land tem-
perature on GDP in Figure 9(b). The impact of ocean temperature on GDP aligns with
the overall effect of global temperature—if anything, it is somewhat larger—suggesting
that ocean temperatures are key to understand the impact of warming on economic ac-
tivity. The impact of land temperature is smaller than ocean temperature, though more
pronounced than the impact of local temperature, suggesting that spatially correlated
changes in local temperature may predict more extreme events than idiosyncratic tem-
peraturefluctuations. Yet,thesecomparisonsarenoisyandsoshouldbeinterpretedwith
caution.
Ourresultshighlightthatitiscriticaltoconsiderclimaticoutcomesbeyondlocaltem-
perature in panel approaches (Kotz et al., 2024), but also illustrates the challenges associ-
ated with such “bottom-up” aggregation exercises. Capturing all relevant local impacts
individuallyischallenging: researchersneedtoknowex-antewhichvariablestoconsider,
beabletomeasurethemconsistentlythroughouttheworld,andaccuratelyestimatetheir
degree of internal persistence. Even then, Figure 9(a) suggests that this “bottom-up” ag-
gregation approach still underestimates the full impact of global temperature even with
27

four measures of extreme events. A key advantage of our time-series approach is that it
directlyencompassesallrelevantlocalimpactsthatarepredictablebyglobaltemperature.
Economicspillovers. Ouranalysisofextremeeventssuggeststhatthereislimitedscope
left for economic spillovers to rationalize the large gap between global and local temper-
atureimpacts. Wenowconfirmthisargumentquantitatively.
When the trading partners of a given country are hit by adverse local temperature
realizations, some of the resulting economic consequences may also be felt domestically
as hypothesized by Neal (2023) and shown in Dingel et al. (2023) and Zappalà (2023).
Howdoesexplicitlyaccountingforsuchspilloversaffectourglobalandlocaltemperature
shockestimates?
To gauge the relevance of economic spillovers, we exploit an intermediate level of
spatial aggregation of local temperature shocks. We first construct an external tempera-
ture measure for each country that averages local temperature in surrounding countries,
weighted by their respective trade share: Tex,trade = ∑ π T , where π denote trade
i,t j̸=i ij i,t ij
shares based on imports plus exports between countries i and j in 1960. Next, we apply
thesameHamilton(2018)filterto Tex,trade toconstructanexternaltemperatureshock.
i,t
Weexpectthetrade-weightedexternaltemperatureshocktohaveasubstantialimpact
on GDP if economic spillovers explain the difference between local and global tempera-
ture impacts. In that case, the effect of global temperature shocks would also be largely
absorbed by the external temperature shock when estimating the impacts jointly. We op-
erationalizetheseideasbyestimatingtheimpactoftrade-weightedexternaltemperature,
bothinisolationandjointlywithglobaltemperatureandwithlocaltemperature.6
Trade-weighted external temperature turns out to moderately affect GDP. At short
horizons,theeffectiscomparabletolocaltemperature. Atlongerhorizons,theeffecteven
turns positive even though the response is not statistically significant (Figure A.12(a) in
AppendixA.11). Figure10(a)showstheresponsestoatrade-weightedexternaltempera-
ture shock and a global temperature shock, jointly estimated in the same local projection
model. The response to the trade-weighted temperature shock from the joint model is
very close to the estimated impact from the individual model. Global temperature con-
tinues to have a substantial adverse impact on GDP, even when controlling for trade-
weightedexternaltemperature.7
6Because we largely leverageregional variation here, we exclude the region-specifictime trends from
oursetofcontrols. Omittingregion-specifictrendsleavesourbaselineresultsvirtuallyunchanged.
7TheshapeoftheresponsetotheglobaltemperatureshockisslightlydifferentfromFigure5because
28

Figure10: TheRoleofEconomicSpillovers
(a)Trade-weightedandglobaltemperature
tnecreP
01
0
01-
02-
(b)Trade-weightedandlocaltemperature
Global temperature shock
External temperature shock, trade-weighted
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
01
0
01-
02-
Local temperature shock
External temperature shock, trade-weighted
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
Notes: Impulse responses of world real GDP per capita to external temperature shocks. Left panel: re-
sponse to a global and trade-weighted shock, estimated jointly in the same local projection specification.
Right panel: response to a local and trade-weighted shock, estimated jointly in the same local projection
specification.Solidlines:pointestimates.Darkandlightshadedareas:90and95%confidencebands.Sam-
pleofcountriesdiffersfrommainanalysisduetoavailabilityoftradedataatthebeginningofthesample.
Figure 10(b) indicates that the effects of local temperature shocks slightly rise when
controllingfortrade-weightedtemperatureshocks. Thischangeisconsistentwithexport-
ledspillovereffectsandspatiallycorrelatedtemperatureshocks. However,quantitatively,
neither the direct effect of local temperature nor the indirect effect of trade-weighted ex-
ternal temperature are able to bridge the gap with global temperature impacts. Overall,
these results suggest that economic spillovers play a limited role in accounting for the
differencebetweenglobalandlocaltemperature.
3.4 Margins of GDP and Regional Impacts
We have documented that global temperature shocks lower world GDP, but how and
wheredoesGDPrespondmost?
We evaluate the effects of global temperature shocks on capital, investment and pro-
ductivity in our panel of countries in Figure 11. Global temperature shocks lead to a
substantial and significant fall in investment and in the capital stock. Consistently with
HsiangandJina(2014),wefindthatdisastersassociatedwithglobalwarmingdonotstim-
ulate growth. Instead, national income, productive capital and investment all dwindle.
Total Factor Productivity (TFP) as estimated in the Penn World Tables and labor produc-
wecannotobtaintradeinformationforallcountriesatthebeginningofoursampleandmustthusrelyon
adifferentsetofcountries.
29

Figure11: TransmissionofGlobalTemperatureShocks
tnecreP
04
02
0
02-
04-
06-
Investment
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
5
0
5-
01-
51-
Capital
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
5
0
5-
01-
51-
02-
Total factor productivity
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
01
0
01-
02-
Labor productivity
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
Notes: Impulse responses of investment per capita, the capital stock per capita, total factor productivity
and labor productivity to a global temperature shock, estimated based on (3) over the period 1960-2019.
Labor productivity: output over employment. Total factor productivity: Penn World Tables. Solid line:
pointestimate. Darkandlightshadedareas: 90and95%confidencebands.
tivity fall significantly after global temperature shocks. The effects strengthen from -2%
onimpactto-10%afterfouryears.
In addition to unpacking the margins of world GDP, we analyze how the impact of
globaltemperaturevariesacrossdifferentregions. Arewarmerorlower-incomecountries
moreaffected? Figure12displaystheimpactofglobaltemperatureshocksonnineregions
of the world. No region gains. We estimate the strongest negative effects—close to -20%
atpeak—inhotregionssuchasSoutheastAsiaandSub-SaharanAfrica. Contrarytolocal
temperature,globaltemperatureleadstoadverseeconomiceffectseveninhigher-income,
colderregions. ThepeakeffectinNorthAmericais-10%,andinEuropeis-7%,albeitnot
verypreciselyestimated.
30

Figure12: RegionalImpactsofGlobalTemperatureShocks
tnecreP
02
01
0
01-
02-
03-
Europe
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
02
01
0
01-
02-
03-
North America
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
02
01
0
01-
02-
03-
Central and East Asia
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
02
01
0
01-
02-
03-
Oceania
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
02
01
0
01-
02-
03-
Latin America
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
02
01
0
01-
02-
03-
Middle East/North Africa
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
02
01
0
01-
02-
03-
Southeast Asia
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
02
01
0
01-
02-
03-
South Asia
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
tnecreP
02
01
0
01-
02-
03-
Sub-Saharan Africa
0 2 4 6 8 10
Years
Notes: ImpulseresponsesofGDPpercapitatoglobaltemperatureshocksfordifferentregionsacrossthe
world based on (3) over the period 1960-2019, conditioning on the different regions. Solid lines: point
estimate. Darkandlightshadedareas: 90and95%confidencebands.
We evaluate whether the impact of global temperature shocks systematically varies
by country baseline temperature and income level in Figure A.24, Appendix A.15. Al-
though somewhat imprecisely estimated, we find suggestive evidence that warm and
low-income countries display the strongest adverse effects of global temperature shocks,
whilecoldandhigh-incomecountriesarelesssensitivetoglobaltemperatureshocks. This
result is qualitatively consistent with previous evidence on local temperature (Dell et al.,
2012; Burke et al., 2015; Nath, 2022). Quantitatively however, global temperature shocks
havelargerandmoreuniformlydetrimentaleffectsthanlocaltemperatureshocks.
So far we established the reduced-form impact of global temperature shocks on eco-
nomic activity at the world and country level. We now turn to our structural model to
31

converttheseestimatesintowelfarelossesandavalueoftheSocialCostofCarbon.
4 A Model of Climate Change Across the World
Our framework closely follows the standard neoclassical growth model. As such, it mir-
rorsthebackboneoftheDynamicIntegratedClimateEconomy(DICE)modelintroduced
by Nordhaus (1992). Our key innovation is to use our reduced-form estimates of the im-
pactofglobaltemperatureshockstostructurallyestimatedamagefunctionsinthemodel.
4.1 Model Description
Setup. Time is continuous and runs forever. There is a unit continuum of infinitely-
livedidenticalhouseholdswhopopulatetheworldeconomy. HouseholdshaveConstant
RelativeRiskAversionflowpreferences: U(C) =
C1−γ−1.
Laborsupplyisexogenousand
1−γ
setto L = 1. Thepurerateoftimepreferenceofhouseholdsis ρ.
t
Firms produce according to a Cobb-Douglas production function in capital K and
t
labor L with time-dependent TFP Z : Y = Z KαL1−α. They hire labor and rent capital
t t t t t t
from households in competitive factor markets. Capital depreciates at rate δ, which is
constantovertimeandcoveredbyfirms. ThepathofproductivityZ isperfectlyforeseen.
t
Households earn wages w , hold capital K and rent it out to firms for production.
t t
The net interest rate is r . Firms make zero profits given constant returns to scale, so we
t
omitprofitsinthebudgetconstraintofthehousehold,whichwrites: C +K˙ = w +r K .
t t t t t
Householdsareendowedwithaninitialcapitalstock K .
0
A competitive equilibrium of our economy is a collection of sequences
∞ ∞
{C ,K ,r ,w } suchthathouseholdsoptimizegivenprices {r ,w } :
t t t t t=0 t t t=0
(cid:90) ∞
max e −ρtU(C )dt subjectto C +K˙ = w +r K given K ;
t t t t t t 0
{Ct,Kt } t 0
firmsoptimizegivenprices{r ,w } : max Z (KD)α(LD)1−α−(r +δ)KD−w LD;and
t t t KD,LD t t t t t t t
t t
factormarketsclear: K = KD and1 = LD.
t t t
Climatechange. WemodelclimatechangeaschangesinTFPZ overtime,relativetoits
t
baseline value Z . We take the path of global mean temperature T relative to a reference
0 t
levelT
0
asgiven,anddenotebyT(cid:98)t ≡ T
t
−T
0
thepathofexcesstemperature. Globalmean
32

temperatureaffectsTFPthroughthestructuraldamagefunction {ζ } :
s s≥0
(cid:18)(cid:90)
t
(cid:19)
Z
t
= Z
0
exp ζ
s
T(cid:98)t−s ds . (6)
0
The structural damage function ζ governs the persistence of the effect of transitory
s
global temperature shocks on TFP. When ζ is a Dirac mass point at s = 0, global tem-
s
perature shocks have purely transitory level effects. When ζ is a positive function that
s
asymptotes to zero, global temperature shocks have persistent level effects. When ζ is
s
a positive function that asymptotes to a positive value, global temperature shocks have
growtheffects.
When temperature T ≡ T is constant, the economy converges to its steady-state with
t
(cid:0) (cid:82)∞ (cid:1)
the corresponding value of TFP Z = Z exp (T−T ) ζ ds . This expression high-
0 0 0 s
(cid:82)∞
lights that the cumulative damage function ζ ds determines the long-run impact of
0 s
globaltemperaturechanges. Inthatcase,ζ needstobeintegrabletoobtainawell-defined
s
steady-state. Hence, under growth effects, there is no well-defined steady-state and the
economy asymptotes to zero for any amount of permanent warming. Yet, in Figure 3 we
donotfindevidencesupportinggrowtheffectsandourestimatesuncoverpersistentlevel
effectsinstead.
We do not model the feedback between the economy and emissions, and associated
externalities,becausewefocusonclimatedamages. Thus,thecompetitiveequilibriumis
efficientasisstandardintheneoclassicalgrowthmodel.
Social Cost of Carbon. In our framework, we define the Social Cost of Carbon as the
one-time dollar amount C that households would pay at time 0 that would make them
indifferentbetweenaworldwithanadditionaltonofCO2emittedattime0,andaworld
startinginsteady-state,withoutemissions,buthavingpaid C.
Given that we do not model emissions directly, we must map a one-time CO2 pulse
into a temperature path in order to calculate the SCC. We follow Folini et al. (2024) and
usethetemperatureresponseofglobalmeantemperaturetoaCO2pulsefromDietzetal.
(2021),itselfbasedonJoosetal.(2013). Dietzetal.(2021)reportthetemperatureresponse
inmultiplestate-of-the-artatmosphericcirculationandradiativeforcingmodels.
We denote by {T(cid:98)
t
SCC}
t≥0
the path of excess warming implied by a one-time pulse of
onetonofCO2emittedattime0. TheaverageresponseinDietzetal.(2021)indicatesthat
aftera1gigatonpulsetemperaturerisessteadilyandeventuallystabilizesat+0.002°Caf-
33

ter 15 years. We remain conservative and use the lower end of available temperature
responses: we define {T(cid:98)
t
SCC}
t≥0
as three quarters of the the multi-model mean in Dietz
et al. (2021), which stands within but at the lower end of the 95% interval that spans the
range of climate model outcomes. Doing so ensures that historical emissions are consis-
tentwithhistoricalwarmingdata. Whenweusethemulti-modelmean,theSCCrisesbya
third. Ourwelfarenumbersremainunchangedastheydonotdependonthetemperature
responsetoaCO2pulse,butinsteadonaparticularwarmingscenario.
We then construct a productivity path {ZSCC} according to equation (6) in which
t t≥0
we use the temperature path {T(cid:98)
t
SCC}
t≥0
rather than a global warming scenario. The
model delivers a path of value functions {VSCC(K)} , equilibrium capital stocks
t t≥0
{KSCC} with initial condition KSCC = Kss, leading to a path of realized values
t t≥0 0
{VSCC(KSCC)} , in response to this CO2 pulse-induced warming. Our definition re-
t t t≥0
quiresthattheSCC C begivenimplicitlyby:
Vss(Kss −C) = VSCC(Kss), (7)
0
where ss superscriptsdenoteinitialsteady-statequantities.
To gain intuition, consider the case when the SCC is not too large. Then, a first
(cid:82)∞
order perturbation implies that the SCC satisfies C = e −ρtu ′(Css)(Css − CSCC)dt =
0 t
1Css−C SCC
, where
Css−C SCC
is the consumption-equivalent welfare loss from the warming
ρ Css Css
implied by the CO2 pulse. These identities indicate that the SCC is equal to the present
stockvaluationofflowconsumption-equivalentwelfarelossesfromthewarminginduced
by the CO2 pulse. While these conditions are useful to gain intuition, in our quantifica-
tionwealwaysusethenonlineardefinition(7)thataccountsforatime-varyingmarginal
rateofsubstitution.
4.2 Estimation Strategy
Our next step is to estimate the structural damage function ζ . To do so, we match the
s
reduced-form impulse response functions of output to global temperature shocks from
Figure7. Weproceedintwosteps.
In the first step, we calibrate our model based on standard values from the literature,
with the exception of our damage function. We set risk-aversion to γ = 1. The capital
share is α = 0.33. The annual capital depreciation rate is δ = 0.08. Our choice of annual
34

purerateoftimepreferenceρ = 0.02followsRennertetal.(2022)andisconsistentwitha
2% annual interest rate in steady-state.8 Of course, the equilibrium path of consumption
in the model determines the effective consumption-based discount rate. We assess the
robustnessofourresultswithrespecttotherateoftimepreferenceinSection5.4below.
In the second step, we invert our model to estimate the sequence of TFP that corre-
spondstoatemperatureshock. Weleveragethattheactualtemperatureshocksthatarise
during our sample are small as in Figure 6 and therefore imply output and capital fluc-
tuations of the order of 1%. Therefore, we can use a first-order perturbation of the model
around the initial steady-state. For any sequence of excess temperature T(cid:98)t , we denote
by z the resulting log deviation in TFP, and by y the log deviation in output along the
(cid:98)t (cid:98)t
transition. Weemphasizethatweuselog-linearizationforestimationonly,notforcounter-
factuals.
Proposition1. (Modelinversion)
Thereexists K giveninAppendixB.3,thatonlydependsonsteady-stateobjectsandisindepen-
t,s
dentfrom {ζ
s
}
s≥0
,suchthat,toafirstorderin {T(cid:98)t }
t≥0
:
(cid:90) ∞
y = z +α K z ds.
(cid:98)t (cid:98)t t,s(cid:98)s
0
Proof. SeeAppendixB.3.
Proposition 1 delivers an identification result. Given observed output response y ,
(cid:98)t
we can recover the underlying sequence of productivity shocks z . The first component
(cid:98)t
in Proposition 1 corresponds to the direct effect of productivity on output. The second
component corresponds to the equilibrium response of capital. It is an integral over all
timesbecauseinvestmentisforward-lookingandcapitalaccumulatesslowlyovertime.
The main content of Proposition 1 lies in this second component. By log-linearizing
equilibrium conditions and solving explicitly for the equilibrium sequence of capital, we
relate capital deviations to the sequence of productivity shocks through the sequence-
space Jacobian K (Auclert et al., 2021; Bilal and Goyal, 2023). In the context of the
t,s
neoclassicalgrowthmodel,thisJacobianadmitsaclosed-formexpressionasafunctionof
parameters and steady-state objects. When Id−αK is invertible—where Id denotes the
8This framework immediately accommodates balanced productivity growth. Provided we adjust the
therateoftimepreferenceandthebaselinecapitaldepreciationrate,standardrescalingargumentsensure
thatallocationsandwelfarewouldbeidenticalincounterfactualswhenthebaselineeconomyisinsteady-
stateoronabalancedgrowthpath.
35

identity map, for instance when α is small enough—productivity shocks are identified.
Proposition 1 allowsus to obtain the sequenceof TFP z that correspond toany sequence
(cid:98)t
oftemperatureshocks T(cid:98)t .
WeuseProposition1toestimate ζ . Weconsidertheresponseofoutputtoanobserved
s
temperatureshockinFigure3(b),thatcorrespondstotheunderlyingtemperaturepath T(cid:98)t
in Figure 3(a). Proposition 1 delivers the corresponding sequence of productivity shocks
z . Wethenidentify ζ astheinnovationstothesesequencesasperequation(6).
(cid:98)t t
This approach is consistent with households having rational expectations about fu-
ture temperature shocks: after a temperature shock, households expect temperature to
remain persistently elevated as in Figure 3(a). One advantage of this approach is that we
identify damage functions off of empirical impulse responses to a shock that is itself per-
sistent. Thus,counterfactualsthatfocusonapermanentincreaseintemperaturebuildon
moments identified from responses to a persistent shock—though not a fully permanent
shock—ratherthanapurelytransitoryshock.
In practice, we face two additional challenges. We address both of them by imposing
asmoothfunctionalformforourstructuraldamagefunction. Weconstrainζ tobeofthe
s
form A (cid:0) e −Bs −e −Cs).
The first challenge that our constrained estimation addresses is that we can only es-
timate the impulse response functions y up to a finite horizon. By contrast, Proposition
(cid:98)t
1 requires the entire impulse response function. We cannot simply set the output im-
pulse response to 0 from year 11 onwards, as this may imply a large underlying capital
windfallgainorlossfortheeconomy. Byconstrainingtheshapeofthestructuraldamage
functions,weuseour10datapointstoestimatethe3damagefunctionparameters.
The second challenge is to discipline the long-run effects of temperature shocks. By
constrainingthestructuraldamagefunctions,weensurethattheeffectsoftransitorytem-
perature changes vanish in the very long run. If we estimated the structural damage
functions entirely unconstrained and with a longer horizon, temperature shocks could
potentially have longer-ranging but extremely imprecisely estimated effects. Therefore,
ourapproachisconservativeinthatitlimitsthelong-runimpactofaone-timetransitory
temperatureshock.
Hence, instead of exactly inverting the model, we estimate A, B and C for ζ us-
s
ing Non-Linear Least Squares to minimize the squared deviations from the equation in
Proposition1forthefirst10yearsonly.
36

4.3 Estimation Results
Figure 13 shows our estimation results. Panel (a) displays the underlying temperature
path from Figure 3. Panel (b) reveals that the estimated model closely fits the empirical
response of output given its limited degrees of freedom. Of course, the model fit relies
on our constrained functional form: if we did not constrain the damage function, the fit
wouldbeone-to-one.
Figure13: Output,CapitalandProductivityGlobalTemperatureShocks
(a)Temperature(°C) (b)Output(percent)
(c)Damagefunction{ζ } ×100 (d)Capital(percent)
s s
Notes: Estimationresultsfrommatchingthemodelimpulseresponsetotheempiricalresponseofoutput
toglobaltemperatureshocks. Panel(a): underlyingtemperaturepath. Panel(b): outputresponsestothis
internallypersistenttemperaturepath. Panel(c): impliedproductivityshocks; confidenceintervalsbased
on the Delta-method. Panel (d): non-targeted capital responses to internally persistent temperature path.
Dashedlines: data. Solidlines: modelfit. 90%(darkarea)and95%(lightarea)confidenceintervals.
Panel (c) depicts the estimated structural damage function ζ . It coincides with the
s
productivity responses to a one-time transitory global temperature shock of 1°C. It im-
plies a short-run productivity loss of 4% that takes place two years after the temperature
shock. Despitethecorrespondingtemperatureshockbeingtransitory,theimpactonpro-
37

ductivitydecaysonlyslowlyandpersistsforupto10years. Theconfidencebandsreflect
theconfidenceintervalsaroundourempiricaloutputresponse.
We test whether the estimated model also delivers empirically plausible implications
for capital. In the estimation, we have not used any information about the empirical
impulseresponseofcapitaltoaglobaltemperatureshock. Panel(d)comparesthepredic-
tion of our estimated model to the data from Figure 11. Despite being non-targeted, the
responseofcapitalinthemodelisclosetoitsempiricalcounterpart.
Howdotheproductivityeffectsofglobaltemperatureshockscomparetothoseassoci-
ated with local temperature shocks? Given that the empirical responses are substantially
smaller for local temperature shocks as shown in Figure 7, such shocks likely also imply
smaller damages. To answer this question quantitatively, we repeat our estimation but
targetingtheimpulseresponseofoutputtolocaltemperatureshocks.
Figure B.1 in Appendix B.4 displays the productivity effects of local temperature
shocks. Thecumulativeproductivityeffectoflocaltemperatureshocksismorethanseven
times smaller than under global temperature shocks. We conclude that global tempera-
tureshockshavemuchlargereffectsoneconomicfundamentals.
5 The Welfare Impact of Climate Change
5.1 Representing Climate Change
To evaluate the consequences of climate change, we specify a path for global mean tem-
perature. The baseline year t = 0 corresponds to 2024. The world subsequently warms
by 3°C above pre-industrial levels by 2100, after which temperature asymptotes to 3.3°C.
This scenario is broadlyconsistent withIPCC business-as-usualscenarios thatimply 3to
4°C of warming by 2100 (Lee et al., 2023). Given that the world has warmed by approx-
imately 1°C since pre-industrial times, this scenario implies 2°C of additional warming
since t = 0(2024)byyear t = 76(2100).
We construct two counterfactuals to highlight the role of global temperature. In the
first counterfactual, we use the structural damage function estimated under global tem-
global
perature shocks ζ in Figure 13(c) to construct productivity changes using equation
s
(6) together with excess temperature T(cid:98)t . In the second counterfactual, we instead use
the structural damage function estimated under local temperature shocks ζlocal in Figure
s
B.1(c),AppendixB.4,usingagainequation(6)togetherwiththesameexcesstemperature
38

path T(cid:98)t .
Our counterfactuals compare allocations and welfare in an economy that warms ac-
cordingtoT(cid:98)t ,toallocationsandwelfareinaneconomythatremainsinsteady-stateunder
T(cid:98)t ≡ 0. Welfare losses from climate change are defined as an equivalent percent decline
insteady-stateconsumption. TheSCCisdefinedinequation(7)andisindependentfrom
theglobalwarmingscenariobecauseitreliesonthetemperatureresponsetoagivenCO2
pulse {T(cid:98)
t
SCC}
t≥0
. Conversely, the welfare calculations are independent from {T(cid:98)
t
SCC}
t≥0
.
To solve for counterfactuals, we use standard global numerical methods to obtain the
globalsolution—weonlyuselog-linearizationforestimation.
5.2 Welfare and the Social Cost of Carbon
Figure 14 presents our main results. Panel (a) depicts the path of global mean tempera-
ture. Panel (b) reveals that output drops rapidly as global temperature rises, relative to a
worldthatisnotwarming. In2050,outputdeclinesby19%. In2100,outputis46%below
what it would have been without climate change. This substantial decline reflects ac-
cumulated productivity losses that eventually reach 34%. These impacts are statistically
significantatthe5%level.
Panel (c) highlights the adverse impact of lower productivity on capital accumula-
tion. Initially,investmentrisesashouseholdsanticipatelowerincomegoingforwardand
therefore save, following standard permanent income logic. Capital starts decumulating
rapidlythereafterunderthepressureofloweroutput. By2100,capitalis37%belowwhat
itwouldhavebeenwithoutclimatechange.
Panel(d)revealsthatconsumptiondrops,eventuallyreachinga37%lossby2100. This
substantial decline in consumption translates into large welfare losses. Panel (e) shows
that the 2024 welfare impact of climate change amounts to a 25% loss in consumption
equivalent percent. This welfare loss exceeds the consumption impact as households
discount but value future declines in consumption as well. As temperature keeps rising,
welfare continues to decline and reaches a 43% loss. All these values are statistically
significantatthe5%level.
Our results indicate that the impact of climate change is substantial. The welfare cost
of climate change is 640 times the cost of business cycles, or 10 times the cost of moving
fromcurrenttraderelationstocompleteautarky. Perhapsmoststrikingly,intermsofout-
put, capital, consumption, and thus welfare, climate change is comparable in magnitude
39

Figure14: TransitionalDynamicsUnderClimateChange
Notes: Transitional dynamics of the estimated model under the scenario in panel (a). Solid blue lines:
model estimated under global temperature. Shaded blue: 90% confidence intervals. Dashed red lines:
model estimated under local temperature. Shaded red: 90% confidence intervals. Confidence intervals
basedontheDelta-method.
totheeffectofthe1929GreatDepressionintheUnitedStates. However,climatechangeis
permanent. Thus,thelossesfromlivinginaworldwithclimatechangerelativetoaworld
withoutitarecomparabletolivinginthe1929GreatDepression,forever.
Panel(f)usesourstructuraldamagefunctiontoconstructtheSCC.WeobtainaSCCof
$1,347 per ton. This value is more than seven times larger than the $185 per ton value in
Rennertetal.(2022). The95%confidenceintervalfortheSCCrangesfrom$469pertonto
$2,264 per ton. Despite non-trivial uncertainty, even the lower bound of that confidence
intervalisseveraltimeslargerthanconventionalSCCestimates.
Wedemonstratethatourfocusonglobaltemperatureshocksisthemaindriverofour
conclusions. Under local temperature damage functions, Figure 14 shows that climate
40

change implies a long-run output decline of 6%, a present value welfare cost of 3% and
a SCC of $178 per ton. None of these effects are statistically significant at the 5 or 10%
level. ThesevaluesandtheassociateduncertaintyareconsistentwithresultsinNordhaus
(1992), Dell et al. (2012), Burke et al. (2015), Nath et al. (2022), and Rennert et al. (2022).
Weconcludethatglobaltemperatureeffectsarebothlargerandmorepreciselyestimated
thanlocaltemperatureeffects.
5.3 Growth Accounting
If the economic effects of global temperature are so large, why were they not noticed
after nearly 1°C of global warming since 1960? We answer this question by analyzing
the historical impact of climate change. We start the economy in 1960 and feed in the
realized path of warming until 2019, after which we impose constant temperature. We
constructcounterfactualchangesinoutputrelativetoabaselineeconomythatremainsin
steady-state. Wethenaddthesechangesdirectlytothedata.
Figure 15 displays the results. Panel (a) reveals that climate change is responsible
for moderate but persistent reductions in the world’s annual growth rate. In the 1960s,
there is little warming and so few effects on economic growth. By 2019, potential growth
without climate change deviates more systematically from realized growth with climate
change. Panel (a) highlights that historical warming occurs in small increments. Warm-
ingshocksthushavemoderateeconomicyear-to-yeareffectsincomparisontoothereco-
nomic shocks. The analysis in Section 2 detects these effects that are otherwise hidden
behindbackgroundeconomicvariation.
Panels (b) and (c) show that the annual growth effects of climate change eventually
accumulatebecauseclimatechangeisapermanentshift,despitehavinganinitiallymod-
erate effect on growth. Panel (b) indicates that climate change reduces the world growth
ratebyasmuchasathirdofbaselinegrowthinthe21st century. Panel(c)showsthatthis
growthslowdownimpliesthatworldGDPpercapitawouldbe19%highertodayhadno
warming occurred between 1960 and 2019. Even though in this counterfactual we hold
temperatureconstantatits2019levelinallsubsequentyears,economiclossescontinueto
accumulate after 2019. These delayed impacts are due to the lagged productivity effects
embedded in our estimated damage functions {ζ } and to the internal transitional dy-
s s
namics of the neoclassical growth model. By 2040, output is 25% below its potential due
to climate change: one quarter of the economic losses caused by past warming are yet to
41

Figure15: GrowthAccountingWithClimateChange
Notes: ImpactofpastclimatechangeonworldGDP.Panel(a): worldoutputgrowthratewith(solidblue)
andwithout(dashedred)climatechange. Horizontallines: sampleaverages. Panel(b): fractionofgrowth
rate lost to climate change (annual growth loss out of 1960-2019 mean). Horizontal line: sample average.
Dashed line: linear regression fit. Panel (c): world output with (solid blue) and without (dashed orange)
climatechange,normalizedtoonein1960.
materialize.
5.4 Sensitivity
Given the sizable magnitude of our results, we investigate which parameters may be
particularly important for them. Figure 16 displays how our results depend on four key
choices: the rate of time preference ρ, our treatment of expectations, 2100 global mean
temperature,andtheclimatesensitivity.
Panel (a) shows 2024 welfare losses as a function of the rate of time preference ρ, and
panel (b) shows the corresponding SCC. As expected, a higher rate of time preference
lowers welfare losses and the SCC: households then discount more damages that are far
in the future. Our baseline rate of time preference ρ = 0.02 is consistent with Rennert
et al. (2022) and with the secular decline in interest rates. However, even at rates of time
preference above 0.04 we still obtain sizable welfare losses in excess of 15%. The corre-
sponding SCC remains two to three times as large as the high end of previous estimates,
andstillseventimeslargerthantheSCCbasedonlocaltemperatureunderthesamerate
of time preference. By contrast, as we approach very low discount rates consistent with
Stern (2006), welfare losses exceed 30% and the SCC rises above $3,000 per ton. Welfare
lossesarelesssensitivetothediscountratethantheSCCbecausewelfarelossesrepresent
anannualizedflowoflosses,whiletheSCCisadiscountedstockvaluation.
42

Figure16: WelfareandtheSocialCostofCarbonunderAlternativeChoices
Notes: SensitivityofwelfarecostsandSocialCostofCarbonin2024withrespecttotherateoftimepref-
erence(ρ),2100globalmeantemperature,theclimatesensitivityandtreatmentofexpectations. Solidblue
lines: model estimated using global temperature shocks under baseline expectations. Dotted blue lines:
model estimated using global temperature shocks with temperature shock surprises. Dashed red lines:
modelestimatedusinglocaltemperatureshocksunderbaselineexpectationswithproductivityshocksonly.
Panels (c) and (d) show welfare losses and the SCC when we vary 2100 temperature
relative to pre-industrial levels. Welfare losses under 10% materialize only at very low
warming scenarios of 1.5°C since pre-industrial levels by 2100. The IPCC evaluates that
the world is on track for 3°C to 4°C above pre-industrial levels under business as usual:
globalmeantemperaturesalreadylargelyexceed1°Csincepre-industriallevels,and2023
reached1.45°Csincepre-industriallevels. Bycontrast,pessimisticscenariosunderwhich
global mean temperatures reach 6°C since pre-industrial levels in 2100 lead to present
value welfare losses of 50%. Of course, in Panel (d), the 2024 SCC is independent from
the warming scenario because it only depends on the temperature response to a CO2
pulse.
Panels (e) and (f) display how the climate sensitivity affect our conclusions. The cli-
mate sensitivity governs how carbon emissions map into current and future warming.
43

Consequently, welfare losses to a given warming scenario in as in panel (e) are indepen-
dent from the climate sensitivity. However, as shown in panel (f), the SCC is not. Our
mainanalysisusesastronglyconservativeclimatesensitivity: threequartersofthemean
climate sensitivity in Dietz et al. (2021). This choice allows our analysis to remain more
closely consistent with the historical link between emissions and warming, but is the
lower end of climate sensitivities produced by leading climate models. When we use the
meanclimatesensitivity,theSCCexceeds$1,700perton. Withalargerclimatesensitivity,
theSCCexceeds$3,000perton.
Figure 16 also shows how our conclusions change when we treat household expec-
tations differently. In our main estimation, we assume that households have rational
expectations about the temperature path following a temperature shock. An alternative
istoassumethathouseholdsaresurprisedeveryperiodbypersistentlyelevatedtemper-
atures following a temperature shock. Under this assumption, we linearly combine our
estimatedimpulseresponsefunctionstoobtaintheoutputresponsestoaone-timetransi-
tory temperature shock. We then target these responses to a transitory shock to estimate
structural damage functions, instead of estimating damage functions first as in our base-
line. We provide more details in Appendix B.4. The dotted lines in Figure 16 displays
our results under this alternative treatment of expectations. The results are very close to
our baseline, highlighting that our baseline treatment of expectations is not driving our
results.
This analysis indicates that substantial climate damages occur over a wide range of
specification choices. We conclude that climate change poses a substantial threat to the
worldeconomy.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we demonstrate that the impact of climate change on economic activity is
substantial. Weleveragenaturalclimatevariabilityinglobalmeantemperaturetoobtain
time-series estimates that are representative of the overall impact of global warming. We
find that a 1°C rise in global temperature causes global GDP to persistently decline, with
a peak loss at 12%. This large effect is due to an associated surge in extreme climatic
events. By contrast, local temperature shocks used in the traditional panel literature lead
to a minimal rise in extreme events and to much smaller economic effects. Together, our
44

results imply a SCC of $1,367 per ton and a 25% welfare loss from a moderate warming
scenario. Theseeffectsarecomparabletoexperiencingthe1929GreatDepression,forever.
Not only do our results indicate that climate change represents a major threat to the
world economy, they also have salient consequences for decarbonization policy. Most
decarbonization interventions cost $80 per ton of CO2 abated (Bistline et al., 2023). A
conventional SCC value of $185 per ton implies that these policies are cost-effective only
ifgovernmentsinternalizebenefitstotheentireworld,ascapturedbytheSCC.However,
a government that only internalizes domestic benefits values mitigation benefits using
a Domestic Cost of Carbon. The DCC is always lower than the SCC because damages
to a single country are less than to the entire world. For instance, under conventional
estimatesbasedonlocalshocks,theDCCoftheUnitedStatesis$36perton,makinguni-
lateral emissions reduction prohibitively expensive. Under our new estimates however,
theDCCoftheUnitedStatesbecomes$273pertonandthuslargelyexceedspolicycosts.
In that case, unilateral decarbonization policy is cost-effective for large economies such
astheUnitedStates.
45

References
Auclert,Adrien,BenceBardóczy,MatthewRognlie,andLudwigStraub(2021).“Using
the Sequence-Space Jacobian to Solve and Estimate Heterogeneous-Agent Models”.
Econometrica89.5,pp.2375–2408.
Bansal, Ravi and Marcelo Ochoa (2011). “Temperature, Aggregate Risk, and Expected
Returns”.NationalBureauofEconomicResearchWorkingPaperSeries17575.
Barro, Robert J. (Aug. 2006). “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Cen-
tury”.TheQuarterlyJournalofEconomics121.3,pp.823–866.
Berg, Kimberly A., Chadwick C. Curtis, and Nelson Mark (2023). “GDP and tempera-
ture: Evidence on cross-country response heterogeneity”. National Bureau of Economic
ResearchWorkingPaperSeries31327.
Bilal, Adrien and Shlok Goyal (2023). “Some Pleasant Sequence-Space Arithmetic in
ContinuousTime”.SocialScienceResearchNetworkWorkingPaper4634993.
Bilal,AdrienandEstebanRossi-Hansberg(2023).“AnticipatingClimateChangeAcross
theUnitedStates”.NationalBureauofEconomicResearchWorkingPaper31323.
Bistline,John,NeilR.Mehrotra,andCatherineWolfram(2023).“EconomicImplications
oftheClimateProvisionsoftheInflationReductionAct”.BrookingsPapersonEconomic
Activity.
Burke, Marshall and Kyle Emerick (2016). “Adaptation to Climate Change: Evidence
fromUSAgriculture”.AmericanEconomicJournal:EconomicPolicy8.3,106–40.
Burke, Marshall, Solomon M. Hsiang, and Edward Miguel (2015). “Global non-linear
effectoftemperatureoneconomicproduction”.Nature527.7577,pp.235–239.
Burke, Marshall, Mustafa Zahid, Noah Diffenbaugh, and Solomon M Hsiang (2023).
“Quantifying Climate Change Loss and Damage Consistent with a Social Cost of
GreenhouseGases”.NationalBureauofEconomicResearchWorkingPaperSeries31658.
Callahan, Christopher W. and Justin S. Mankin (2023). “Persistent effect of El Niño on
globaleconomicgrowth”.Science380.6649,pp.1064–1069.
Cerra, Valerie and Sweta Chaman Saxena (2008). “Growth Dynamics: The Myth of Eco-
nomicRecovery”.AmericanEconomicReview98.1,pp.439–57.
Conte, Bruno, Klaus Desmet, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg (2022). “On the Geographic
Implications of Carbon Taxes”. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Se-
ries30678.
Cruz, José-Luis and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg (2023). “The Economic Geography of
GlobalWarming”.TheReviewofEconomicStudies91.2,pp.899–939.
46

Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken (2012). “Temperature shocks
andeconomicgrowth:Evidencefromthelasthalfcentury”.AmericanEconomicJournal:
Macroeconomics4.3,pp.66–95.
— (2014). “What Do We Learn from the Weather? The New Climate–Economy Litera-
ture”.JournalofEconomicLiterature52.3,pp.740–798.
Deryugina,Tatyana(2013).“Theroleoftransferpaymentsinmitigatingshocks:Evidence
fromtheimpactofhurricanes”.SocialScienceResearchNetworkWorkingPaper2314663.
Deschênes, Olivier and Michael Greenstone (2011). “Climate Change, Mortality, and
Adaptation:EvidencefromAnnualFluctuationsinWeatherintheUS”.AmericanEco-
nomicJournal:AppliedEconomics3.4,pp.152–85.
Desmet,Klaus,RobertE.Kopp,ScottA.Kulp,DávidKrisztiánNagy,MichaelOppen-
heimer, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, and Benjamin H. Strauss (2021). “Evaluating the
Economic Cost of Coastal Flooding”. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 13.2,
pp.444–86.
Desmet,KlausandEstebanRossi-Hansberg(2015).“OntheSpatialEconomicImpactof
GlobalWarming”.JournalofUrbanEconomics88,pp.16–37.
Dietz, Simon, Frederick van der Ploeg, Armon Rezai, and Frank Venmans (2021). “Are
Economists Getting Climate Dynamics Right and Does It Matter?” Journal of the Asso-
ciationofEnvironmentalandResourceEconomists8.5,pp.895–921.
Dingel,JonathanI.,KyleC.Meng,andSolomonM.Hsiang(2023).“Spatialcorrelation,
trade, and inequality: Evidence from the global climate”. National Bureau of Economic
ResearchWorkingPaperSeries25447.
Domeisen, Daniela I. V., Elfatih A. B. Eltahir, Erich M. Fischer, Reto Knutti, Sarah E.
Perkins-Kirkpatrick,ChristophSchär,SoniaI.Seneviratne,WeisheimerAntje,and
Heini Wernli (2023). “Prediction and Projection of Heatwaves”. Nature Reviews Earth
andEnvironment4,36–50.
Driscoll, John C. and Aart C. Kraay (1998). “Consistent covariance matrix estimation
with spatially dependent panel data”. Review of Economics and Statistics 80.4, pp. 549–
560.
Folini,Doris,AleksandraFriedl,FelixKübler,andSimonScheidegger(Jan.2024).“The
ClimateinClimateEconomics”.TheReviewofEconomicStudies.
Hamilton, James D. (2018). “Why you should never use the Hodrick-Prescott filter”. Re-
viewofEconomicsandStatistics100.5,pp.831–843.
Hsiang,SolomonM.andAmirS.Jina(2014).“TheCausalEffectofEnvironmentalCatas-
trophe on Long-Run Economic Growth: Evidence From 6,700 Cyclones”. National Bu-
reauofEconomicResearchWorkingPaperSeries20352.
47

Hsiang, Solomon M., Kyle C. Meng, and Mark A. Cane (2011). “Civil conflicts are asso-
ciatedwiththeglobalclimate”.Nature476,438–441.
Joos, F., R. Roth, J. S. Fuglestvedt, G. P. Peters, I. G. Enting, W. von Bloh, V. Brovkin,
E. J. Burke, M. Eby, N. R. Edwards, T. Friedrich, T. L. Frölicher, P. R. Halloran, P. B.
Holden, C. Jones, T. Kleinen, F. T. Mackenzie, K. Matsumoto, M. Meinshausen, G.-
K.Plattner,A.Reisinger,J.Segschneider,G.Shaffer,M.Steinacher,K.Strassmann,
K. Tanaka, A. Timmermann, and A. J. Weaver (2013). “Carbon dioxide and climate
impulse response functions for the computation of greenhouse gas metrics: a multi-
modelanalysis”.AtmosphericChemistryandPhysics13.5,pp.2793–2825.
Jordà,Òscar(2005).“Estimationandinferenceofimpulseresponsesbylocalprojections”.
AmericanEconomicReview95.1,pp.161–182.
Jordà,Òscar,MoritzSchularick,andAlanM.Taylor(2020).“Theeffectsofquasi-random
monetaryexperiments”.JournalofMonetaryEconomics112,pp.22–40.
Kahn, Matthew E., Kamiar Mohaddes, Ryan N.C. Ng, M. Hashem Pesaran, Mehdi
Raissi, and Jui-Chung Yang (2021). “Long-term macroeconomic effects of climate
change:Across-countryanalysis”.EnergyEconomics104,p.105624.
Kaufmann, Robert K., Heikki Kauppi, and James H. Stock (2006). “Emissions, concen-
trations,&temperature:atimeseriesanalysis”.ClimaticChange77,pp.249–278.
Kose,M.Ayhan,NaotakaSugawara,andMarcoE.Terrones(2020).“Globalrecessions”.
Kotz, Maximilian, Anders Levermann, and Leonie Wenz (2024). “The Economic Com-
mitmentofClimateChange”.Nature628,pp.551–557.
Krusell,PerandAnthonyA.Smith(2022).“Climatechangearoundtheworld”.National
BureauofEconomicResearchWorkingPaperSeries30338.
Lee, Hoesung, Katherine Calvin, Dipak Dasgupta, Gerhard Krinner, Aditi Mukherji,
Peter Thorne, Christopher Trisos, José Romero, Paulina Aldunce, Ko Barret, et al.
(2023).“IPCC,2023:ClimateChange2023:SynthesisReport,SummaryforPolicymak-
ers. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Sixth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, H. Lee and J.
Romero(eds.)].IPCC,Geneva,Switzerland.”
MontielOlea,JoséLuisandMikkelPlagborg-Moller(2021).“Localprojectioninference
issimplerandmorerobustthanyouthink”.Econometrica89.4,pp.1789–1823.
Montiel Olea, José Luis, Mikkel Plagborg-Moller, Eric Qian, and Christian K. Wolf
(2024).“DoubleRobustnessofLocalProjectionsandSomeUnpleasantVARithmetic”.
NationalBureauofEconomicResearchWorkingPaperSeries32495.
Moore,FrancesC.,MoritzA.Drupp,JamesRising,SimonDietz,IvanRudik,andGer-
not Wagner (2024). “Synthesis of Evidence Yields High Social Cost of Carbon Due to
48

Structural Model Variation and Uncertainties”. National Bureau of Economic Research
WorkingPaperSeries32544.
Moscona, Jacob and Karthik A. Sastry (Oct. 2022). “Does Directed Innovation Mitigate
ClimateDamage?EvidencefromU.S.Agriculture*”.TheQuarterlyJournalofEconomics
138.2,pp.637–701.
Nath, Ishan (2022). “Climate Change, The Food Problem, and the Challenge of Adapta-
tionthroughSectoralReallocation”.WorkingPaper.
Nath, Ishan B., Valerie A. Ramey, and Peter J. Klenow (2022). “How Much Will Global
Warming Cool Global Growth?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
Series32761.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (2005). Volcanos and Climate. Online
Resource.
— (2009).ClimateChange:IncomingSunlight.OnlineResource.
— (2023).WhatareElNiñoandLaNiña?OnlineResource.
Neal, Timothy (2023). “The Importance of External Weather Effects in Projecting the
Macroeconomic Impacts of Climate Change”. UNSW Economics Working Paper 2023-
09.
Newell,RichardG.,BrianC.Prest,andStevenE.Sexton(2021).“TheGDP-temperature
relationship: implications for climate change damages”. Journal of Environmental Eco-
nomicsandManagement108,p.102445.
Nordhaus, William D. (1992). “An optimal transition path for controlling greenhouse
gases”.Science258.5086,pp.1315–1319.
— (2013). “Integrated economic and climate modeling”. Handbook of Computable General
EquilibriumModeling.Vol.1.Elsevier,pp.1069–1131.
Phan, Toan and Felipe F. Schwartzman (2024). “Climate defaults and financial adapta-
tion”.EuropeanEconomicReview170,p.104866.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009). “The aftermath of financial crises”.
AmericanEconomicReview99.2,pp.466–472.
Rennert, Kevin, Frank Errickson, Brian C. Prest, Lisa Rennels, Richard G. Newell,
William Pizer, Cora Kingdon, Jordan Wingenroth, Roger Cooke, Bryan Parthum,
et al. (2022). “Comprehensive evidence implies a higher social cost of CO2”. Nature
610.7933,pp.687–692.
Rudik, Ivan, Gary Lyn, Weiliang Tan, and Ariel Ortiz-Bobea (2022). “The Economic Ef-
fectsofClimateChangeinDynamicSpatialEquilibrium”.WorkingPaper.
Seneviratne,S.I.,X.Zhang,M.Adnan,W.Badi,C.Dereczynski,A.DiLuca,S.Ghosh,
I.Iskandar,J.Kossin,S.Lewis,F.Otto,I.Pinto,M.Satoh,S.M.Vicente-Serrano,M.
49