SELECTING THE MOST EFFECTIVE NUDGE: EVIDENCE FROM A
LARGE-SCALE EXPERIMENT ON IMMUNIZATION
ABHIJIT BANERJEE†,∗,§, ARUN G. CHANDRASEKHAR‡,∗,§, SURESH DALPATH#,
ESTHER DUFLO†,∗,§, JOHN FLORETTA∗, MATTHEW O. JACKSON‡,?, HARINI KANNAN∗,
FRANCINE LOZA∗, ANIRUDH SANKAR‡, ANNA SCHRIMPF∗, AND MAHESHWOR SHRESTHA§
Abstract. Policymakers often choose a policy bundle that is a combination of different
interventions in different dosages. We develop a new technique—treatment variant aggre-
gation (TVA)—to select a policy from a large factorial design. TVA pools together policy
variantsthatarenotmeaningfullydifferentandprunesthosedeemedineffective. Thisallows
us to restrict attention to aggregated policy variants, consistently estimate their effects on
the outcome, and estimate the best policy effect adjusting for the winner’s curse. We apply
TVA to a large randomized controlled trial that tests interventions to stimulate demand
for immunization in Haryana, India. The policies under consideration include reminders,
incentives, and local ambassadors for community mobilization. Cross-randomizing these
interventions, with different dosages or types of each intervention, yields 75 combinations.
The policy with the largest impact (which combines incentives, ambassadors who are in-
formation hubs, and reminders) increases the number of immunizations by 44% relative to
the status quo. The most cost-effective policy (information hubs, ambassadors, and SMS
reminders but no incentives) increases the number of immunizations per dollar by 9.1%
relative to status quo.
Date: September 14, 2022.
We are particularly grateful to the the Haryana Department of Health and Family Welfare for taking the
lead on this intervention and allowing the evaluation to take place. Among many other, we acknowledge
the tireless support of Rajeev Arora, Amneet P. Kumar, Sonia Trikha, V.K. Bansal, Sube Singh, and Har-
ish Bisht. We are also grateful to Isaiah Andrews, Adel Javanmard, Adam McCloskey, and Karl Rohe for
helpfuldiscussions. WethankEmilyBreza,DenisChetvetrikov,PaulGoldsmith-Pinkham,BenGolub,Nar-
giz Kalantarova, Shane Lubold, Tyler McCormick, Douglas Miller, Francesca Molinari, Suresh Naidu, Eric
Verhoogen, and participants at various seminars for suggestions. Financial support from USAID DIV, 3iE,
J-PAL GPI, and MIT-Givewell, and NSF grant SES-2018554 is gratefully acknowledged. Chandrasekhar
is grateful to the Alfred P. Sloan foundation for support. We thank Rachna Nag Chowdhuri, Diksha Rad-
hakrishnan, Mohar Dey, Maaike Bijker, Niki Shrestha, Tanmayta Bansal, Sanjana Malhotra, Aicha Ben
Dhia, Vidhi Sharma, Mridul Joshi, Rajdev Brar, Paul-Armand Veillon, and Chitra Balasubramanian, as
well as Shreya Chaturvedi, Vasu Chaudhary, Shobitha Cherian, Louis-Mael Jean, Anoop Singh Rawat, Elsa
Trezeguet, and Meghna Yadav for excellent research assistance.
†Department of Economics, MIT.
‡Department of Economics, Stanford University.
#Public Health Planning, Policy, and M&E, Health Department, Govt. of Haryana.
∗J-PAL.
§NBER.
?Santa Fe Institute.
0
2202
peS
21
]PA.tats[
2v54690.4012:viXra

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 1
1. Introduction
In many settings, policymakers have to select the best policy bundle that combines sev-
eral interventions that can come in different dosages and varieties, generating a large sets of
potential policies. For example, to reduce school dropout in a low income country, a policy-
maker might want to introduce a cash transfer, which may be conditional or not, be more or
less generous, and come in combination with a remedial education program or not. Similarly
in medicine, a particular treatment regimen may combine several drugs in different potential
dosages. For example, the management of HIV-AIDS was revolutionized in the mid 1990 by
the combination of two or three drugs in subtle dosages, the famous “AIDS Cocktail.”
The ideal strategy, if time and implementation capacities were not constraints, would be
to experiment iteratively in the context until the best bundle is found. There is a growing
literature on how to conduct and analyze adaptive trials (Hadad et al., 2021; Kasy and
Sautmann, 2021; Zhan et al., 2021). However, it is often not possible to conduct such
sequential trials: the window for experimentation may be short before a policy must be
chosen, or a decision on a treatment regimen or vaccine must be made quickly because of
an urgent health threat. This was certainly true in the case of HIV-AIDs, where there were
huge pressures to rapidly identify and approve a treatment. In such cases, the only option
may be to conduct a large scale experiment that simultaneously tests many different policy
bundles. For example, Saquinavir, the first protease inhibitor, was approved by the FDA
in 1995. As soon as 1996, the seminal ACTG-320 trial evaluated the three-drug cocktail
(Hammer et al., 1997).
However, with several alternative interventions and multiple possible dosages, there is
an enormous number of potential combinations, each of which is a unique policy bundle.
For example, with three candidate interventions and five possible dosages for each one, the
policymaker must select among 125 unique policy bundles. There is no clear guidance in the
literature on how to design and analyze such trials when the number of potential options
is large. For some, this is a fundamental limitation of using randomized controlled trials
to inform policy or even treatment choices (Easterly, 2014; Ravallion, 2009). There are so
many potentially relevant options that one is caught between oversimplifying the context
by assuming that only a few of these options are relevant, or having to deal with too many
variables for any finite sample.
We fill this gap by developing a methodology for treatment variant aggregation (TVA):
a principled algorithm that pools together policy variants that have similar impact and
prunes policy options that are ineffective. This reduces the dimensionality of the problem
and enables identification of the best overall combination and the consistent estimation
of its impact, accounting for the winner’s curse. We then apply this methodology to an
urgent policy problem: how to increase the take up of childhood immunization in India. We

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 2
analyze a large-scale experiment that we carried out in partnership with the government in
thestateofHaryana, India, wherethreecandidateinterventionsandseveraldifferentdosages
generated75potentialuniquepoliciesspreadover915villages. Weidentifythemosteffective
and the most cost-effective combination of interventions.
Ourmethodologyallowsustosolvetwoproblemsthatarisewhenevaluatinglargenumbers
of candidate policy bundles.
First, the researcher must decide how many and which potential policies to include in an
experimentaldesign, andhowtoanalyzethetrial. Oneapproach, recommendedinMcKenzie
(2019), is to only include a limited number of bundles, for example by omitting all policies
that are combinations of each other, or alternatively by varying only one marginal. For
example, the ACTG-320 trials compared the three drug cocktail (protease inhibitor plus two
nucleosides), in one specific dosage, to the two nucleosides in the same dosage (Hammer
et al., 1997). However, the optimality of such an approach presumes an “oracle property:”
that the researcher or policymaker already knows which policies are worth comparing. We
consider situations in which any of many policy bundles could turn out to be optimal. For
suchsituations, onecanincludealluniquepolicybundlesinafully-saturatedfactorialdesign.
This reduces power since each policy bundle may only be observed on a small sample. To
increaseprecision,researchersoftenattempttopoolpolicybundlesex-postbasedonobserved
outcomes. Withoutspecificstructuretotheproblem,thiscanbemisleadinginfinitesamples,
especially when interaction effects are small (so that a test against zero has limited power),
butnotquitezero(“local-to-zero”, Muralidharanetal.(2019)). Weneedtofindminimaland
realistic assumptions on the inferential environment that enable a principled, data driven
approach to reducing the dimensionality of the problem.
The second problem is that the impact of a policy that is estimated to be the best out of a
set of K unique policies (henceforth we use “policy” as a short-hand for “policy bundle”) is
likelytobeover-estimated, duetothe“winner’scurse”(Andrews, Kitagawa, andMcCloskey,
2021). Some policy k? could have the highest estimated impact partially due to a high true
effect, but could also partially be due to randomness. Conditional on being the best in the
data, some of the estimated impact is likely due to randomness. As a result, the expected
impact of policy k? is overestimated and the statistician must adjust for it.
The statistical setting that we analyze is as follows. There are M possible intervention
arms, R possible “dosages” per arm (including zero) and therefore K = RM possible policies.
The policymaker is uncertain about which policies are effective. However, it can be that in
some circumstances an incremental dosage change on some arm does not have a meaningful
effect on the outcome, for some other combination of other arms. For example, if there are
three drugs (x,y,z), and two adjacent dosages z and z0 for the third drug (e.g., 10mg and
20mg), then it is possible that (x,y,z) = (x,y,z0) for some particular choices of x and y.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 3
We can thus pool those two policies, (x,y,z) and (x,y,z0), and treat them as one for all
practical purposes. The policymaker conducts treatment variant aggregation (TVA). This
pools together policy variants that are not meaningfully different (e.g., (x,y,z) and (x,y,z0)
arepooledtogetheras above) andprunes allthe combinations thatareineffective(those that
pool with the null policy). TVA allows us to restrict attention to aggregated policy variants
and only those that matter, which can improve estimation. We discuss how we can use TVA
to consistently estimate policy effects and estimate the best policy effect adjusting for the
winner’s curse. Our main contribution is to develop the TVA procedure, which proceeds in
several steps.
The first step is to re-represent the fully-saturated factorial regression of the outcome
on unique policies in terms of another, equivalent specification that tracks the effects of
incremental dosages. TVA utilizes a Hasse diagram lattice of policy variants to deduce how
zeros in the marginal effects determines pruning and pooling of variants.
To fix ideas, consider a simple example with two arms (M = 2) and two non-zero dosages
for each (R = 3), yielding K = 9 unique policies. So each arm can either be used or not,
and used in either a low or high dose. Let us represent these by [T ,T ] = [0,0], [0,1], [0,2],
1 2
[1,0], etc., where the entries are the corresponding treatment levels with 0 being not used,
and 1 being low and 2 high dosage. A standard regression would just have a dummy variable
for each particular policy combination [T ,T ], and then a corresponding coefficient β .
1 2 [T1,T2]
Instead, it is useful to break these into marginal effects, in terms of a different regression:
(1.1) y = α +α ·1{T ≥ 1}·1{T = 0}+α ·1{T = 0}·1{T ≥ 1}
[0,0] [1,0] 1 2 [0,1] 1 2
+α ·1{T = 2}·1{T = 0}+α ·1{T = 0}·1{T = 2}
[2,0] 1 2 [0,2] 1 2
+α ·1{T ≥ 1}·1{T ≥ 1}+α ·1{T = 2}·1{T ≥ 1}
[1,1] 1 2 [2,1] 1 2
+α ·1{T ≥ 1}·1{T = 2}+α ·1{T = 2}·1{T = 2}+(cid:15).
[1,2] 1 2 [2,2] 1 2
In this specification, the α are all marginal effects, and hence, inspecting the vector
[r1,r2]
α and checking which α = 0 tells us which adjacent policies can be pooled together,
[r1,r2]
and which ones can be pruned (pooled with the null policy; for instance, if α = 0). In a
[1,0]
general factorial design of K unique policies, we have regressors of the form 1{T ≥ r , T ≥
1 1 2
r ,..., T ≥ r } for treatment arm intensities T and thresholds r for arm m, with
2 M M m m
K −1 regressors plus an intercept. At every stage we ask whether an incremental increase
in dosage for a given arm of some policy causes a marginal change. That is, we check for
zero effects: α = 0 for some or multiple [r ,...,r ].
[r1,...,rM] 1 M
This approach makes use of the researchers’ a priori knowledge of which policies can
be pooled: these are policies that are dosage variations of the same treatment profile, or
underlying policy type. Therefore, it places discipline on the problem. It ensures we are
not mis-naming pooled choices by pooling non-comparable policy bundles, which is the issue

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 4
implicitly raised in Muralidharan et al. (2019).1 We assume that when there are non-zero
marginaleffects, thoseeffectsizesarelargeenough—assumingawaythelocal-to-zerorange—
so that we may actually discover and make inferences about the best policy combinations.2,3
Our goal is to identify the support (the set of non-zero coefficients) of the regression
equation (1.1). Under our maintained assumptions, a natural way to do this is to use
LASSO. This requires an extra step. The regressors in equation (1.1) are typically strongly
correlated. For instance, 1{T = 2} · 1{T = 0} implies 1{T ≥ 1} · 1{T = 0}. This
1 2 1 2
means that the marginal effects specification fails the necessary and sufficient condition for
LASSOsupportconsistency, of“irrepresentability,” whichrequiresthatregressorsarenottoo
correlated (Zhao and Yu, 2006). Thus, the second step is to apply the Puffer transformation
to the variables to which LASSO is being applied (Rohe, 2014; Jia and Rohe, 2015). This de-
correlates the design matrix that comes from (1.1). We show that the the specific structure
of the RCT makes it particularly suitable for this technique.
OnceLASSOhasbeenappliedonthePuffer-transformedvariablestoconsistentlyestimate
the marginal effects support, the third step is to reconstruct a set of unique policies taking
into account the pooling and pruning implied by the LASSO results.
The fourth step is to estimate OLS on the new set of unique policies, post-selection. Using
an argument adapted from Javanmard and Montanari (2013), we show that this estimator
is consistent and asymptotically normally distributed.4
Finally, the fifth step is to estimate the effect of the best pooled and pruned policy,
adjusting for the winner’s curse (Andrews et al., 2021). There are three advantages of
conducting this adjustment post-TVA. First, when there are fewer potential alternatives to
the best policy k?, the odds of picking the best by chance are lower. Second, with fewer
alternatives, it is less likely that the second-best alternative has an effect that is similar
to the k? effect. Had it been more likely that the second-highest alternative had an effect
similartothehighesteffect, theadjustmentforbiaswouldrequireamorestringentshrinkage
1Specifically, Muralidharan et al. (2019) take issue with “short models” such that, for example, what is
claimedastheeffectof(x,0,0)—e.g.,proteaseinhibitoronitsown—actuallyalsoincludessomeoftheeffect
of (x,y,0)—e.g., where a nucleoside is given in combination with the protease inhibitor. In this sense the
treatmentis“mis-named”. InTVA,thepolicy(x,y,0)isconsideredtobeacategoricallydifferenttreatment
type from (x,0,0) for x,y > 0. More generally, the pooled policy names always unambiguously indicate
which unique policy combinations are pooled together.
2In practice, we show in Section 3.3 through simulations that we may relax the local-to-zero assumption in
several directions (we study five regimes) and still retain strong performance for this final objective.
3Our approach works when these assumptions to allow regularization are palatable. When the assumptions,
orreasonablerelaxations,cannotbejustified,sequentialtesting,ratherthansimultaneoustestingwithpost-
selection processing, is unavoidable.
4The important detail here is that the convergence in distribution is not uniform (in the parameter space)
Leeb and P¨otscher (2005). Nevertheless, asymptotic normality holds pointwise (in the parameter space)—
essentially, in our setting, the non-uniformity does not have much bite since incorrect selection of the high-
effect policies happens with probability tending rapidly to zero.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 5
penalty. Our procedure avoids this. Third, there is the benefit of coherence: if two policies
are essentially the best and can be pooled, there is no point in applying a strong shrinkage
penalty.
We apply this framework to a large-scale immunization experiment that we conducted
in Haryana, India, from December 2016 to November 2017. Immunization is recognized as
one of the most effective and cost-effective ways to prevent illness, disability, and death.
Yet nearly 20 million children do not receive critical immunizations each year (UNICEF
and WHO, 2019). Though resources directed towards immunization have increased steadily,
there is mounting evidence that insufficient parental demand has contributed to stagnating
immunization rates (WHO, 2019). This has motivated experimentation with “nudges,” in-
cluding conventional ones such as small cash or in-kind incentives,5 SMS reminders,6 as well
as more novel interventions such as symbolic social rewards7 or using influential individuals
in a social network as “ambassadors.”8 We conducted this experiment in partnership with
the Government of Haryana, which was interested in selecting the best policy for full scale
adoption in the state. We cross-randomized three arms with different nudges that had shown
some promise in earlier work: (1) monetary incentives, (2) SMS reminders, and (3) seed-
ing ambassadors. Incentives came in two types (linear and convex) with two dosages each
(low and high in terms of value). SMS reminders had two dosages. Either 33% or 66% of
caregivers received SMS reminders (and voicemails) about the next scheduled vaccination.
Ambassadors where either randomly selected or selected through a nomination process. The
nomination process was done in three ways, one of which came in two dosages (Information
Hub). All together, we have 75 unique policies and 915 villages were at risk for all three
treatments taken together.
Applying TVA and the winner’s curse adjustment, we find that the best policy is to
use information hubs and either low or high SMS coverage, in combination with convex
incentives that can be either low or high. This increases the number of immunizations by
44% (p < 0.05). Choosing the cheapest among these suggests that the policymaker should
chose low convex incentives, send SMS to 33% of caregivers, and identify information hubs
to relay the message. To maximize the number of immunization per dollar spent, the best
policy is using information hubs along with SMS reminders at 33% or more of caregivers
covered. Adjusting for the winner’s curse, it increases the number of immunizations per
dollar by 9.1% (p < 0.05) compared to the status quo with no additional intervention. It is
the only policy that strictly increases the number of immunizations per dollar spent.
5See Banerjee et al. (2010); Bassani et al. (2013); Wakadha et al. (2013); Johri et al. (2015); Oyo-Ita et al.
(2016); Gibson et al. (2017).
6See Wakadha et al. (2013); Domek et al. (2016); Uddin et al. (2016); Regan et al. (2017).
7See Karing (2018).
8See Alatas et al. (2019); Banerjee et al. (2019).

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 6
Theresultshighlighttheimportanceofcomplementaritiesthatmaygetlosthadafactorial
design not been used. Information hubs magnify the effect of other interventions and spark
diffusion: neither incentives nor reminders are selected on their own, but are selected when
combined with information hubs, which spark diffusion. Similarly, information hubs are not
selected on their own, but are selected when combined with the conventional strategies. This
suggests that in cases where there are no strong reasons to rule out interactions a priori, it
is important to accommodate them in the design and the statistical analysis.
2. Treatment Variant Aggregation
This section describes the setup and proposes the methodology for treatment variant
aggregationandforestimationoftheimpactofthebestpolicyafteradjustingforthewinner’s
curse.
2.1. Overview andSetup. WehavearandomizedcontrolledtrialofM armsandRordered
dosages ({none, intensity 1,..., intensity R − 1}). This yields K := RM unique treatment
combinations or unique policies. Let T be a dummy variable indicating that unit i is
ik
assigned to unique policy k. Unique policies are described as variants of each other when
they differ only in the (non-zero) dosages of the treatments applied.9
Assuming the same number of dosages per arm is for notational ease and without sub-
stantive loss of generality. In practice the number of dosages per arm can vary.
The unique policy regression is given by
(2.1) y = Tβ0 +(cid:15) .
i i
The support of this regression is given by the set of unique policies that have non-zero effect
relative to control,
n (cid:12) (cid:12) o
S := k ∈ [K] : (cid:12)β0(cid:12) 6= 0 .
β (cid:12) k(cid:12)
Some of the variants have equivalent effects and ought to be considered as one policy.
Others may be altogether ineffective and ought to be pruned (i.e., pooled with control).
We construct a method of treatment variant aggregation (TVA) in order to pool and prune
variants systematically.
2.1.1. Treatment Profiles and Policy Variants. A fundamental concept is a treatment profile.
Thisclarifieswhichuniquepoliciesarevariants ofeachother; i.e., couldpotentiallybepooled
with one another (without being pooled with the control).
The treatment profile P(k) of a unique policy k simply designates which of the M arms
are active (dosages are positive), without regards to how high the dosage is. Two unique
9This implies in particular that two unique policies differing only in whether some arm is active or inactive
(dosage is zero) are not considered variants, as formalized below.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 7
policies k,k0 are mutual variants if and only if P(k) = P(k0), i.e. exactly the same arms are
active for both policies. Thus, K unique policies are categorized into 2M treatment profiles.
Example 1. In the case of our experiment, consider observation i that has an assigned
policy k =(No Ambassador, 33% SMS, low-value flat incentives) and observation j that
has an assigned assigned policy k0 =(No Ambassador, 66% SMS, low-value flat incentives).
Though k and k0 are distinct treatment combinations, they share the same treatment profile—
P (k) = P (k0)—of (No Ambassador, Some SMS, Some incentives). Therefore k and k0
are variants. They would not be variants if instead k0 =(No Ambassador, 66% SMS, No
incentives).
2.1.2. Treatment Variant Aggregation: Pooling and Pruning. Increasing the dosage in a
treatment arm may be inconsequential after a point, and more generally minor policy vari-
ants may have the same impact. Here, we consider a re-specification of (2.1) that explicitly
tracks the marginal effect of increasing dosages by grouping together policy variants that
have the same effect on the outcome, described below.10 When these marginal effects are
zero, this means that a set of variants are to be either pooled or pruned.
Letting Z denote the matrix of indicator variables for the pooled policies, our goal is
STVA
to estimate the pruned and pooled policy regression:
(2.2) y = Z η0 +(cid:15).
STVA STVA
Comparing (2.2) with (2.1), η0 are the projection coefficients of Tβ0 onto Z , that cor-
STVA
responds to simply grouping certain policies, and estimating the parameters for the grouped
policies. Notice that some policies may end up pooled with the control and we refer to this
as pruning.
Let P denote the set of all partitions of the K policies. Elements of P index every
conceivable pooling designation of the K policies. A specific pooling designation is given
by Π, some specific partition of K policies. Whether two given policies k and k0 are pooled
corresponds to whether they are members of the same part of the partition, π ∈ Π.
The universe of all conceivable poolings is disciplined by a set of rules Λ governing the
admissible poolings. The admissible pools are then a strict subset P ⊂ P. The target
|Λ
S ∈ P is defined to be the maximally admissible pooled and pruned set of policies (i.e.,
TVA |Λ
the coarsest partition).
10While sometimes what is “dosage” and “dosage ordering” is readily apparent from the arm, as in the SMS
arm of our intervention with saturation levels 33% and 66%, in other cases the researcher has to decide this
(of course this can be pre-specified). For example, in the seeds arm of our intervention, we decided that
the information hub ambassador comes in two dosages, with those that are trusted for health advice as the
higher dosage.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 8
We now define the admissible pooling rules Λ. It is useful to represent policies in terms
of its assigned intensities in each arm. Let us say k := [r ,...,r ] where r is the intensity
1 M i
assigned to in arm i. There is a natural partial ordering of policies with respect to their
intensities, whereby if k := [r ,...,r ] and k0 := [s ,...,s ] in the intensity representation,
1 M 1 M
then we say k ≥ k0 if ∀i ∈ [M],r ≥ s ; i.e., the intensities of k in each arm weakly dominate
i i
those of k0. Finally, let k denote the control or null policy, with intensity representation
0
[0,...,0].
Assumption 1. Π is an admissible pooling respecting Λ—i.e., Π ∈ P —if and only if
|Λ
(1) k,k0 ∈ π implies β0 = β0. Only policies with equal treatment effects may be pooled.
k k0
(2) k,k0 ∈ π implies P(k) = P(k0) or k ∈ π. Only variants may be pooled, or if non-
0
variant policies are being pooled then they must also be pooled with the control (null
policy).
(3) k,k0 ∈ π and k ≤ k00 ≤ k0 (in the intensity ordering) imply that k00 ∈ π. Pooling can
only involve contiguous variants, and cannot skip any intermediate policies.
(4) Let k,k0 ∈ π have intensity representations k := [r ,...,r ,...,r ] and k0 := [r ,...,r −
1 i M 1 i
1,...,r ]. Then, for any two j,j0 such that P(j) = P(j0) = P(k) = P(k0), j < k, j0 <
M
k0 and with intensity representations j := [s ,...,r ,...,s ], j0 := [s ,...,r −1,...,s ],
1 i M 1 i M
it must be true that j,j0 ∈ π0 (where π0 possibly equals π).11
Assumption 1 (part 1) is the basic requirement on pooling.12 Assumption 1 (part 2)
imposes some essential structure for interpretability. It ensures that we avoid pooling non-
comparable bundles—a problem identified by Muralidharan et al. (2019). Limiting the pool-
ing to variants cleaves the combinatorially vast universe of unstructured, conceivable pools
to those that are more policy relevant. So pooling comparisons are only made within-profile,
with the sole exception being when policies are pruned (pooled with control).
Assumption 1 (parts 3 and part 4) capture the implications running a regression of out-
comes on profile dummies as well as marginal variables that capture main effects and com-
plementarities as one climbs dosages, as in equation (1.1) in the Introduction and (2.4)
below. Both fall out of equation (2.3) that relates coefficients between the unique policy and
marginal effects regressions and tells one how to add up marginal effects to retrieve policy
effects.
Conceptually, part3stemsfromthefactthatmarginalstrackwhetherincremental dosages
matter or not. Thus, contiguous variants are pooled so long as all incremental dosage effects
in the relevant directions are zero. However, when an incremental dosage that tracks a
complementarity between arms has nonzero effect, it cleaves apart policies not just “locally”
11We use j <k to indicate that j ≤k and j 6=k.
12Notethatafinitesamplepoolingprocedureadmitsapoolonlyifitcannotrejectthatestimatedtreatment
effects are equal.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 9
but in an entire region of the treatment profile. Part 4 expresses this “externality.” The
intuition and function of this condition is presented below in an example in Figure 2, panels
B and E.
We can depict typical (non pruning) pooling choices for a treatment profile in a Hasse
diagram. In a Hasse diagram, a line upwards from variants k to k0 implies k0 > k, and there
is no variant k00 such that k0 > k00 > k (in the partial order). The running example is the
case of a 2 arm treatment of 4 intensities (3 nonzero intensities “low”, “medium”, “high”);
i.e., M = 2,R = 4 and the treatment profile where both arms are “on”. Figure 1 depicts
the Hasse for this treatment profile. Here unique policies are named per their intensity
representations; i.e., [r ,r ] where r ∈ {1,2,3} is the (nonzero) dosage in arm i.
1 2 i
Pooling choices respecting Λ for this treatment profile show up as particular “concatena-
tions” of adjacent policies on the original Hasse diagram. The top panels of Figure 2 (panels
A-C) depict key examples for this treatment profile. In panel A, where arm 2 is at low
intensity, the exact intensity that arm 1 is set at is irrelevant for treatment effect. That is,
β = β = β and so {[1,1],[2,1],[3,1]} can be concatenated to generate a policy we
[1,1] [2,1] [3,1]
can call [1 : 3,1].
In panel B, for low and medium intensities in both arms, increasing the intensity on arm
1 from 1 to 2 makes a difference but the intensity of arm 2 is irrelevant. That is β = β
[1,1] [1,2]
and β = β but β 6= β and the concatenated pooled policies are [1,1 : 2] and
[2,1] [2,2] [1,1] [2,1]
[2,1 : 2].
In panel C, again for the low and medium intensities in the two arms, the exact intensities
of both arms are irrelevant. That is, β = β = β = β and the concatenated
[1,1] [1,2] [2,1] [2,2]
pooled policy is [1 : 2,1 : 2].
We now illustrate the connection between these policy “concatenations” respecting Λ and
marginal effects. For a treatment combination k, α0 is the marginal effect of the dosages in k
k
within its treatment profile relative to incrementally lower dosages. Formally, the marginal
effects α0 may be defined implicitly so that a policy’s effects are the sum of marginal effects
from increasing dosages up to its particular dosage profile:
(2.3) β0 = X α0 .
k k0
k0≤k;P(k0)=P(k)
Equation (2.3) can be inverted to recover α0 in terms of β0. An explicit expression for its
terms α0 is more unwieldly in its full generality, but depending on the policy k, it can be
k
a difference between two variants’ effects or reflect a complementarity, i.e., the interaction
effect from combining dosages in different arms. This is consistent with the interpretation
that a policy’s effects are the main effects of the highest dosages in each arm, considered
separately, plus the relevant interaction effects.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 10
We can now see how Λ-respecting policy concatenations in the Hasse show up as zeroes
in the marginals α0 by interpreting Figure 2, panels D-F, in light of equation (2.3). In
panel D, α = α = 0, i.e., keeping the intensity fixed as low in arm 2, there is no
[2,1] [3,1]
marginal contributions of increasing the intensity in arm 1. Since α = β −β , and
[2,1] [2,1] [1,1]
α = β −β , the concatenations on panel A ensue.
[3,1] [3,1] [2,1]
In panel E, since α = (β −β )−(β −β ), it reflects a ‘complementarity’ in
[2,2] [2,2] [2,1] [1,2] [1,1]
increasing the dosages from low to medium in both arms. Since this is zero, it makes arm
2’s relevance parallel in for both low and medium intensities of arm 1; i.e., β − β =
[2,2] [2,1]
β − β . Since arm 2 is irrelevant when arm 1 is low—because α = 0—it follows
[1,2] [1,1] [1,2]
that β = β and β = β , permitting the concatenations in the above panel B. No
[2,2] [2,1] [1,2] [1,1]
further concatenations ensue since α 6= 0 =⇒ β 6= β . This illustrates the role of
[2,1] [2,1] [1,1]
Assumption 1 (part 4), since the creation of pooled policy [2,1 : 2] also implies the creation
of policy [1,1 : 2]. Indeed, there is a simple depiction of Assumption 1 (part 4) in the Hasse
diagrams for treatment profiles: for any parallelogram that one can draw in the Hasse, if
the “top” segment is pooled together, so must the “bottom” segment (in a possibly distinct
pooled policy).
On the other hand, in panel F, the small change of setting the marginal α = 0 con-
[2,1]
catenates both low and medium intensities in both arms.
As illustrated through these examples, zeros in α0 thus show up as policy concatenations
in Hasse diagrams, and more formally, as pooling decisions respecting Λ. This motivates the
marginal effects regression:
(2.4) y = Xα0 +(cid:15).
This is an invertible transformation of (2.1). X can be interpreted as indicators
X := 1{k(i) ≥ ‘ ∩ P (k(i)) = P (‘)}.
i‘
In other words, X assigns for unit i a “1” for all policy variants that share k(i)’s treatment
profile and are weakly dominated in intensity by k(i) and a “0” otherwise.
Estimating (2.4) is informative of the zeros in α0. Knowledge of the zeros is of course
equivalent to the knowledge of its complement, the support of (2.4):
n (cid:12) (cid:12) o
S := j ∈ [K] : (cid:12)α0(cid:12) 6= 0 .
α (cid:12) j(cid:12)
The idea is to apply a model selection procedure to estimate S . In Appendix B, we show
α
how to construct the unique maximally pooled and pruned set S ∈ P from S .13 The
TVA |Λ α
13Following this same procedure with any estimate Sbα leads to an estimate SbTVA of pooled and pruned
policies.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 11
maximality ensures that no contiguous set of intensities thought to have the same treatment
effects are left un-pooled.
In sum, we are interested in the following treatment variant aggregation and best-policy
effect estimation procedures:
(cid:16) (cid:17)
(1) Consistently select support: P Sb = S → 1.
α α
(cid:13) (cid:13)
(2) Consistently estimate effects after pooling and pruning: (cid:13)ηˆ −η0 (cid:13) → 0.14
(cid:13) SbTVA STVA (cid:13) ∞ p
(3) Find the best policy κˆ? = argmax ηˆ
κ∈SbTVA SbTVA,κ
and generate an unbiased estimate of best policy effect η0 .
κˆ?
Our object of interest in (3), following Andrews et al. (2021), is the estimated best policy
effect rather than the true best policy effect. As a consequence the impossibility result of
Hirano and Porter (2012) on inference does not apply in our setting.15
Note the two levels of estimation in ηˆ . The random estimand η0 is defined even
SbTVA SbTVA
when Sb is misspecified.16 ηˆ are estimated coefficients in the (possibly misspecified)
TVA SbTVA
model. The best policy effect estimand η0 is an element of η0 .
SbTVA,κˆ? SbTVA
2.2. Pooling and Pruning for Support Selection. The next step is to identify the sup-
port S . The natural place to start would be to apply LASSO directly to (2.4). However,
α
this approach fails sign consistency because the marginal effects matrix X fails an “irrep-
resentability criterion” which is necessary for consistent estimation (Zhao and Yu, 2006).
Irrepresentability bounds the acceptable correlations in the design matrix. Intuitively, it
requires that variables that are not in the support are not too strongly correlated with those
that are. Otherwise, an irrelevant variable is “representable” by relevant variables, which
makes LASSO erroneously select it with non-zero probability irrespective of sample size. We
show with a proof by construction that irrepresentability fails in our setup in Appendix C.
The idea is higher dosage variants will end up being representable by lower dosage treatment
combinations, violating the requirement.
A way out is provided by Jia and Rohe (2015). They show that, under some conditions,
one can estimate the LASSO support by transforming the data to recover irrepresentability.
They demonstrate that a simple left-multiplication (pre-conditioning) can de-correlate the
data (at the expense of inflating variance in the error).
In Proposition 2.1 we demonstrate that in the specific instance of the crossed RCT design
with ordered intensities, the pre-conditioning strategy of Jia and Rohe (2015) can be applied
because the relevant sufficient conditions are met. Specifically, with an RCT, we can exactly
14We write (2) somewhat informally here because (1) happens with high probability (exponentially in n)
tending to one as will be formalized in detail in Proposition 2.2
15The reason their impossibility result arises is because the max-operator, necessary to retrieve the true
best policy effect, is nondifferentiable. For the estimated best mean, however, we do not need to apply the
max-operator after conditioning on κˆ?, hence usual inference applies.
16This estimand is obtained from the orthogonal projection of Tβ0 onto the subspace generated by SbTVA .

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 12
characterize the design matrix and therefore the inflation factor. We can show that the
variance inflation cost is tolerable, in the sense that we can consistently recover the support
and the treatment effects.
The weighting is constructed as follows. Let us take the singular value decomposition of
X := UDV0 where U is an n×K unitary matrix, D is a K ×K diagonal matrix of singular
values, and V is a K×K unitary matrix. The Puffer transformation—so named for the fish
whose shape is suggested by the geometry of this transformation—is F := UD−1U0. The
regression of interest is now
(2.5) Fy = FXα+F(cid:15)
where F(cid:15) ∼ N (0,UD−1ΣD−1U0). As Jia and Rohe (2015) note, this satisfies irrepresentabil-
ity since (FX)0(FX) = I, which is sufficient (Jia and Rohe (2015), Bickel et al. (2009)).
To understand why this works, recall that the matrices U and V0 can be thought of
as rotations and D as a rescaling of the principal components. So, the transformation F
preserves the rotational elements of X without the rescaling by D and FX = UV0 as its
singular value decomposition (with singular values of 1).
The reason this is useful is because when a matrix X has correlation, then the ith singular
value of X captures the residual variance of X explained by the ith principal component
after partialling out the variance explained by the first i−1 principal components. So, when
there is high correlation within X, less than K principal components effectively explain the
variation in X and so the later (and therefore lower) singular values shrink to zero. F inflates
the lowest singular values of X so that each of the principal components of the transformed
FX explains the variance in FX equally. In that sense, FX is de-correlated and, for K < n,
is mechanically irrepresentable. The cost is that this effective re-weighting of the data also
amplifies the noise associated with the observations that would have had the lowest original
singular values. Of course if the amplification is too strong, it can can hinder efficiency of
LASSO in finite sample and even prevent the sign consistency of LASSO, in the worst case.17
The reason why LASSO is particularly amenable to the Puffer transformation in our
specific setting of the cross-randomized experiment with varying dosages is that the marginal
effects design matrices are highly structured. In particular, the assignment probabilities to
the various unique treatments are given, and as a result, the correlations with X are bounded
away from 1. This has the implication that the minimum singular value is bounded below
so that under standard assumptions on data generation, LASSO selection is sign consistent.
While this is guaranteed for a sample size that grows in fixed K, the more important test is
whether it works when K goes up with n; we need to show that the Puffer transformation
17In K > n cases–not studied here and not having a full characterization in the literature–even irrepre-
sentabilityisnotimmediateandthetheorydevelopedisonlyforspecialcases(auniformdistributiononthe
Stiefel manifold) and a collection of empirically relevant simulations (Jia and Rohe, 2015).

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 13
does not destroy the sign consistency of LASSO selection as the minimal singular value of
X goes to zero as a function of K. In Lemma A.1, we bound the rate at which the minimal
singular value of X can go to zero as a function of K in a crossed RCT such as ours and
Proposition 2.2 below relies on this lemma to then prove that the Puffer transformation
ensures irrepresentability and consistent estimation by LASSO in our context.
We make the following additional assumptions and discuss their restrictiveness below.
Assumption 2 (RCT design gowth). R ≥ 3, K < n, and K = O(nγ) for some γ ∈
[0,1/2).18
Assumption 3 (Minimal marginal effect size). |S | < K and min |α | > c > 0 for c
α k∈Sα k
fixed in n.
Assumption 4 (Homoskedasticity). (cid:15) i ∼ id N (0,σ2I ), with σ2 > 0 fixed in n.
i n
Assumption 5 (Penaltysequence). Take a sequence λ ≥ 0 such that λ → 0 and λ2n1−2γ =
n n n
ω(logn).
Assumption 2 restricts the growth of the problem, preventing settings with too many
treatments relative to observations. Without this assumption, the correct support may not
be estimated with probability tending to one, and the post-estimators may not necessarily be
asymptotitcally normally distributed. In practice, it means that the RCT cannot have cells
in the fully saturated treatment design with very few units assigned to that unique treatment
combination. Assumption 3 is the conventional LASSO-sparsity assumption applied to the
marginal effects formulation. It imposes that adjacent policy variants are either appreciably
different or have no difference (i.e., the so-called “beta-min” assumption in the literature).
Wedonothandlethecaseoflocalalternativesamongadjacentvariants—i.e., verysmallyet
non-zero differences, but policies that are not variants of each other or are nowhere adjacent
are allowed to be local alternatives as discussed in Section 2.4.2. Assumption 4 places
our theory under homoskedastic errors following the literature on Puffer transformation.
Extension to heteroskedasticity is left for future work. Finally, Assumption 5 imposes a
restriction on the LASSO-penalties, standard in the regularization literature.
Proposition 2.1. Assume 1-5. Let α be the estimator of (2.5) by LASSO:
e
α := argmin kFy −FXak2 +λ kak .
e a∈RK 2 n 1
Then P(sign(α) = sign(α0)) → 1.
e
18ThisassumptioncanbeslightlyweakenedtoK =o(n1
2
)fortheresultsuptosupportconsistency(Proposi-
tion2.1)tohold. However,onewouldthenneedafurtherassumptionthatK2log(K)=o(n)forpost-LASSO
inference under a normal distribution (Proposition 2.3) to hold. The intuition is that the growth rate of K
mustbetemperedforthecentrallimittheoremtooperateinthisgrowingparameterregime. OurAssumption
2 satisfies this requirement automatically.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 14
All proofs are in Appendix A unless otherwise noted.
2.3. Consistency of the TVA Estimator. Having constructed an estimator Sb of the
α
supportS , thenextstepistouseAlgorithm2inSectionCtoconstructSb , theestimated
α TVA
set of pooled and pruned unique policies, and then estimate policy effects. The regression of
interest is (2.2). We show this estimator is consistent.19
Proposition 2.2. Assume 1-5. Let ηˆ be the post-Puffer LASSO OLS estimator of (2.2)
SbTVA
on support Sb TVA . Then, with probability at least
1−2e−n1−
2σ
2
2
γλ2
+γlogn → 1,
s
(cid:13) (cid:13)
logn
(cid:13)ηˆ −η0 (cid:13) ≤ C ·
(cid:13) SbTVA STVA (cid:13) ∞ n1−γ/2
for any C > 0 fixed in n.
2.4. The Effect of the Best Policy. Another policy relevant issue is the recommendation
of a “best policy” together with an estimate of the effect of the best policy. Intuitively,
to select the best policy, we can scan the post-LASSO estimates of policies in Sb . As
TVA
Andrews et al. (2021) note, the maximum of the set of estimated policies is subject to the
winner’s curse. In order to correct this, Andrews et al. (2021) make use of the asymptotic
normality of the estimators in question that are to be compared. So, we proceed in two
steps. First, we demonstrate that ηˆ is indeed asymptotically normally distributed. This
SbTVA
allows us to use the winner’s curse procedure, that we then apply as a second step.
2.4.1. Asymptotic Normality. The post-Puffer LASSO estimators are asymptotically nor-
mally distributed (pointwise) for the following reason. If the correct support, S were
TVA
always selected, mechanically the estimators are asymptotically normal.
So, in practice, we need to worry about two errors: (a) the asymptotic distribution of the
estimator with some incorrect support being selected and (b) the asymptotic distribution
of the true estimator when the incorrect support is selected. We show in Appendix A that
both of these terms are small in our setup.
Intuitively, the second term can be ignored. After all, the true estimator itself is asymp-
totically normally distributed, so given the very unlikely event of incorrect selection, this
term is asymptotically negligible. The first term requires more work. But again, one can
show that the amount of potential bias accumulated due to selecting the wrong support is
19We thank Adel Javanmard for a helpful discussion of the proof.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 15
slow relative to the rate of actually estimating the wrong support.20 Therefore, we have the
following result.21
Proposition2.3. Assume2, 3, 4, and5. LetH := plimZ0 Z /nandJ := plimZ0 ΣZ /n
STVA STVA STVA STVA
exist. Then, ηˆ , the post-Puffer LASSO selection OLS estimator of (2.2) performed on
SbTVA
support Sb , is asymptotically distributed
TVA
√
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
n ηˆ −η0 (cid:32) N 0,H−1JH−1 .
SbTVA SbTVA
It is well-known that one cannot uniformly (over the parameter space) build post-selection
asymptoticdistributions(LeebandP¨otscher,2005,2008). Thisisthesubjectofmuchdiscus-
sion of a larger literature on post-selection inference—interpretations of the post-estimation
procedures and practical function (Berk et al., 2013; Tibshirani et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2016).
In our context, several remarks are worth making. First, our claim is about pointwise infer-
ence, not uniformity over the parameter space. Second, we have nothing to say conditional
on incorrect selection, hence the non-uniformity. Still, no matter what model is selected—
even if an incorrect one—since in our setting the regressors are always orthogonal, there is
some valid post-selection interpretation in the sense of Berk et al. (2013), but we do not
characterize what occurs in the vanishing probability events. Third, as we recover the sup-
port with probability tending to one, and at an exponential rate, in a practical sense the
non-uniformity occurs only for very small local alternatives.22 Loosely, recall that the non-
uniformity comes up when the probability of correct selection does not go to one, or along
the sequence is local to the event of failed selection. Given the very high rate of correct se-
lection (tending to one exponentially fast in n), these local alternatives must be exceedingly
close to the true parameter (the sequence of alternatives converging to the true parameter
at very fast rate in n). See analogous discussion in McCloskey (2020) and the discussion of
(A.1) in that paper.
Indeed, consistent with the theoretical results, as we will show in Section 3.1.3, the es-
timators look normal in practice indicating that the non-uniformity concerns are likely to
not be large in at least many practical cases, in our specific setting. Further, there is an
interesting subtlety that arises in our case in particular. In our setting which concerns best
20An entirely different approach would be to use a recent focus in the literature on exact post-selection
inference using the observation that the LASSO procedure to select a model generates a polyhedral condi-
tioning set Lee et al. (2016). This generates a parameter estimator distribution that is a truncated, rather
than complete, normal. In our special environment—a correctly specified linear model, sparse parameters,
restrictionsonshrinkagerateofminimalvaluesofparametersonthesupport—thetruncationpointsdiverge
whenconditioningontheeventthatthetruemodelistheestimatedmodel. Inthewinner’scursecontextan
analogouspointismadeinAndrewsetal.(2021),Proposition3. Thismeansthatthedistributionreturnsto
theusualGaussian. However, weprovideasimpler, directargumentwherewecancalculatethedistribution
when the correct support is selected and bound the problematic terms in the event of poor selection.
21We again thank Adel Javanmard for a helpful discussion of the proof.
22We are grateful to Adam McCloskey for pointing this out.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 16
policies, since the elements with the highest effects tend to be selected first, and because of
orthogonality, in practice the large parameter estimates almost always perform well.
2.4.2. Adjusting for the Winner’s Curse. The next step is to apply the result of Andrews
et al. (2021). We leverage the results of their Proposition 9.23
We are interested in picking the best estimated policy:
κˆ? = argmax ηˆ
κ∈SbTVA SbTVA,κ
With this we have the estimate of the best estimated policy’s effect ηˆ . Andrews et al.
SbTVA,κˆ?
(2021) demonstrate that this naive estimate will be biased and how to adjust for it.
Since all estimated policy effects, ηˆ for κ ∈ Sb , are regression coefficients and therefore
κ TVA
random variables, there is some chance in any sample that ηˆ > ηˆ even though
SbTVA,κ SbTVA,κ0
η0 < η0 and therefore the ordinal ranking would be incorrect. For a fixed amount
SbTVA,κ SbTVA,κ0
of noise in the regression model (2.2), if the policies were better separated — so |η0 −
SbTVA,κ
η0 | were larger — then the probability of incorrectly ordinally ranking the two policies
SbTVA,κ0
κ and κ0 would be smaller.
As we are doing asymptotic analysis and not exact finite-sample analysis, the asymptotic
√
version of this finite-sample problem is when policy effects differ by order 1/ n . That is,
consider two policy effects
r
η0 = η0 + √κκ0
STVA,κ STVA,κ0 n
withη0 well-separatedfrom0andr aconstantfixedinn. Inthiscase, theasymptotic
STVA,κ0 κκ0
distribution of the difference between the estimates of these two policy effects will be non-
vanishing, capturing the finite-sample problem.
In this setup, despite the fact that the two policies κ and κ0 have effects that differ
√
by a Θ(1/ n) term, they are still well-separated from 0 and therefore satisfy the mini-
mum amplitude condition (Assumption 3, relative to control). To see this, observe that if
η0 > c > 0 then for at most all but finitely many n, η0 > c as well.
STVA,κ0 STVA,κ
To satisfy our Assumption 3, such policies κ, κ0 must either not be policy variants (i.e.,
have different treatment profiles), or, if they do have the same profile, not be too similar in
terms of dosage. If not, the difference between them, were they to cause the finite sample
problem necessitating a winner’s curse adjustment, would also contradict Assumption 3 and
therefore affect the LASSO estimation. This is formalized in the following lemma.
Lemma 1. Assume 1 and suppose κ,κ0 ∈ S are local alternatives, i.e., η0 =
TVA STVA,κ
η
S
0
TVA,κ0
+ r √κκ
n
0 for some r
κκ0
fixed in n. Then, for α0 to respect Assumption 3, one of the
following has to hold:
23We thank Isaiah Andrews and Adam McCloskey for helpful discussions.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 17
(1) P(κ) 6= P(κ0) (i.e., κ and κ0 have different treatment profiles 24), or
(2) P(κ) = P(κ0), and κ and κ0 are nowhere adjacent in the Hasse diagram.25
These conditions are also sufficient to allow for local alternatives, in that for any S ∈
TVA
P , all pairs κ,κ0 ∈ S meeting condition (1) or (2) can be simultaneously made local
|Λ TVA
alternatives by some choice of α0 satisfying Assumption 3.
Assumption 6. There are at most q < ∞, independent of n, pairs of local alternatives,
i.e., pairs κ,κ0 ∈ S
TVA
such that η
S
0
TVA,κ
= η
S
0
TVA,κ0
+ r √κκ
n
0 where r
κκ0
fixed in n. α0 respects
Assumption 3.
Under this assumption, there are still pairs of policies that are distinct but may have
similar effects. Since they might be selected as the first and second best in the data, may
therefore exhibit finite-sample bias due to the winner’s curse.
Now define X(κ) := ηˆ . From the arguments presented in the previous part of the
SbTVA,κ
paper X (cid:32) N (µ,Ω), where µ can be written in terms of the mean of a reference policy κ ,
0
i.e., µ = η0 +c+ r √κκ0 , where c is some constant of separation and r is either 0 or a
STVA,κ0 n κκ0
constant depending on whether κ and κ are local alternatives or not.
0
Before continuing, we adapt our setting to that of Andrews et al. (2021). The main text
of the paper focuses on the case where the estimators in question, X(κ) are exactly jointly
normally distributed. While two extensions are presented, one for a conditioning event such
as model-selection (addressed in their Appendix A) and another for the case of asymptotic
normality which is required for practical settings such as regression (in their Appendix D),
the paper does not formally work out the case with both issues present.
We have both in our setting, under Assumptions 1-6. We have a conditioning event
(Sb = S ) occurring with probability tending to one and we are in a regression setting
TVA TVA
with asymptotic normality. So while the theoretical properties of the estimator in our setting
are highly plausible and coherent with our simulations below, the extension to the nested
case of model selection remains to be proven. It is beyond the scope of our present paper
here to nest both of their extensions, and we leave it for future work.
So, to continue, we assume that the distribution is exact. This allows us to focus on how
local alternatives in our Hasse diagram may impact the problem. Therefore, we assume
X ∼ N (µ,Ω).
24Thisisaslightabuseofnotation,sinceP(·)wasdefinedoriginallyovertreatmentcombinations,notpooled
policies. So, P(·) here is the simply the well defined extension to the latter.
25Formally, this is the condition that for any treatment combinations k,k0 such that κ pools k and κ0 pools
k0, either k and k0 are incomparable or there is a treatment combination z pooled by neither κ nor κ0 such
that min{k,k0}<z <max{k,k0}.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 18
ThenwecanexactlyapplytheresultsofProposition6inAndrewsetal.(2021), andbuildthe
hybrid confidence set. In particular, we can construct the hybrid estimator based on chosen
significance levels α,β such that β < α. The hybrid estimator ηˆhyb is approximately
SbTVA,κˆ?
median unbiased (with absolute median bias bounded by β) with confidence intervals with
2
coverage 1−α, conditional on η0 falling within a simultaneous confidence interval (with
1−β SbTVA,κˆ
respect to the post-LASSO estimates ηˆ0) of level 1−β. A summary of the overall procedure
is presented in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Estimating Treatment Effects by Treatment Variant Aggregation
(1) Given treatment assignment matrix T, calculate the treatment profile and marginal
dosage intensity matrix X.
(2) Estimate Sb := {j ∈ [K] : |α | =6 0} by estimating (2.4) through a Puffer
α ej
transformed LASSO.
(3) Calculate marginal effects support Sb from Sb using Algorithm 2 in Appendix B.
TVA α
(4) Estimate pooled and pruned treatment effects of unique (relevant) policies, ηˆ ,
using regression (2.2).
SbTVA
(5) To estimate the best policy in Sb , select κˆ? = argmax ηˆ , construct
TVA κ∈SbTVA SbTVA,κ
the hybrid estimator ηˆhyb with nominal size α and median bias tolerance β/2.
SbTVA,κˆ?
Under the setting described above, it is important to note that even when wrong policies
are selected the error is negligible.
Remark 1. Conditional on correct support selection Sb = S , when there are local
TVA TVA
alternatives near the true best policy, the wrong policy may be selected with non-vanishing
probability. (When there are no local alternatives around the true best policy, then with high
probability the correct winner is always selected.) But the post-selection estimates of this
√
wrong policy are Θ(1/ n) different from the true best-policy effect.
3. Simulation Performance
Here we run simulations in the environment described in Section 2 – namely, when a
sparse set of policies have meaningful and meaningfully different impacts. In Section 3.1
we show that TVA has strong performance in this environment. In Section 3.2 we show it
outperforms several other standard approaches; the relative deficiencies of other estimators
also highlight the features that give TVA its edge. Finally, in Section 3.3 we relax sparsity
and lower bounded marginal effect sizes in the environment and show that TVA is still a
strong candidate for these settings.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 19
3.1. Performance of TVA. Below, we describe the simulation setup and performance
indicators. The idea is to generate simulated design matrices from marginal specifications
(2.4) that resemble the data, score these on certain metrics, and aggregate these scores into
measures of performance for sample size n.
3.1.1. Simulation Setup. Throughout our simulations we use the following common setup:
q
(1) Fix R = (5,5,3),M = 3 and σ := var((cid:15)) = 2.3: parameters are chosen to loosely
mimic our experiment where 3 treatment arms have asymmetric intensities leading
to 75 unique policies and where σ is chosen such that the R2 of the post-LASSO
regression matches the experiment for a similar sample size.
(2) The simulation results are plots of performance mˆ(n) against sample size n where n
ranges between 1,000 and 10,000.26
(3) These scores mˆ(n) are generically computed as follows.
(a) A set C of true supports of the marginal specification (2.4) is randomly cho-
sen. Each member Si ∈ C is a particular support or “configuration” and each
α
configuration has fixed support size |Si| = M. Specifically, each configuration
α
C is constructed by randomly sampling M covariates of X. Furthermore, if
Si = (k ,k ,..,k ) in some given order, we assign coefficients α = 1+4· j−1 .
α 1 2 M kj M−1
That is, these nonzero coefficients are linearly spaced between 1 and 5. Thus
each configuration fully specifies the set of coefficients α for (2.4).
(b) For each Si ∈ C, a set S (n) of simulations (design matrices) is generated
α S α i
based on the coefficients specified by the configuration, and the Gaussian noise,
with sample size n. For each simulation sˆ(n) ∈ S (n), it is scored by a metric
Si
α
m(sˆ(n)) that will be specified.
(c) These scores are aggregated over simulations S (n), and then aggregated again
Si
α
over configurations C, to produce the aggregated performance score mˆ(n).
3.1.2. Performance Measures. Denoting by Sbi(sˆ(n)) the model selection estimator for Si
α α
for simulation sˆ(n), we use the following performance metrics throughout our simulations:
Support selection accuracy:
|Sbi(sˆ(n))∩Si|
m(sˆ(n)) := α α .
|Sbi(sˆ(n))∪Si|
α α
This is a value between 0 and 1 that increases with support coverage, and is 1 if and only
if the support is correctly selected. To construct the aggregated metric mˆ(n) it is averaged
over the simulations per configuration, and then averaged again over configurations.
26For some computationally intensive simulations n is logarithmically spaced.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 20
“Some” best policy inclusion accuracy:

 1 if κˆi?(sˆ(n))∩κi? 6= ∅
m(sˆ(n)) =
 0 otherwise
where κi? = argmax η denotes the true best pooled policy in the marginal effects
κ∈S
T
i
VA
STVA,κ
support Si (uniquely determined from Si). This measure is again averaged over simu-
TVA α
lations per configuration, and then averaged over configurations. The final metric therefore
gives the share of simulations per n where at least one true best policy was pooled into the
estimated best pooled policy.
Minimum dosage best policy inclusion accuracy:

 1 if ki?min ∈ κˆi?(sˆ(n))
m(sˆ(n)) =
 0 otherwise
where ki?min denotes the true minimum dosage best policy.27 Once aggregated this measure
captures the share of simulations, per n where the minimum dosage best policy was included
in the estimated best pool.
Mean squared error (of best policy effect): For each simulation sˆ(n), the estimated
best policy treatment effect is scored by its error with respect to the true treatment effect:
m(sˆ(n)) := ηˆhyb −η .
SbTVA,κˆ?
STVA,κ?
And thus mˆ(n) is simply the estimated MSE:
1 1
mˆ(n) := X X m2(sˆ(n)).
|C| |S (n)|
C S α i S
Sα
i(n)
3.1.3. Properties of TVA. Simulation performance of TVA attests to its main theoretical
properties: supportconsistency, best policy estimationconsistency, and normally distributed
coefficient estimates.
Figure 3 depicts these results. For TVA consistency, consider the blue and green perfor-
mancepointsinpanelsBandD.PanelBshowsthatevenforlown, TVAincludessomeofthe
best policies in Sb as well as rapidly (in n) and consistently including the minimum dosage
α
best policy, that is of particular interest to the policymaker. Because TVA pools policies
27The “intersection” and “inclusion” operators for the best policy inclusion measures are to be understood
in the following way: suppose the true best policy κi? ∈ Si pools together m policies as per Si that
TVA α
we can organize into a set S = {ki?,··· ,ki?min,··· ,ki?}. Equivalently we organize into S the n policies
1 1 m 2
composing the estimated best pool as per Sb
α
i(n). Then κˆi?(sˆ(n)) stands for S
2
and κi? for S
1
.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 21
that comprise the best policy, redundancies to winner’s curse attenuations are minimized;
Panel D shows that MSE of the best policy starts small and quickly falls to 0 (blue dots).
Finally, besides best policy consistency, a more global concern is whether the TVA estimator
is support consistent in the first place. This is explicitly verified in further simulations of our
Online Appendix (e.g., Figure E.2). As elaborated in Section 3.2, this overall performance
is in marked contrast to other estimators.
Besides being consistent, TVA estimates are also distributed asymptotically normally„
which permits reliable inference in the usual manner. This is demonstrated in Figure 3,
Panel A which depicts a close match between the empirical CDF of standardized marginal
policy estimates ηˆκ−ηκ (for κ ∈ Sb , entered as a mixture distribution with equal weights)
se(ηˆκ) TVA
and the CDF of a standard normal distribution for a series of sample sizes. First, abstracting
away from model misspecification complications, consider the case of a large sample size
(n = 10,000) where the empirical support of TVA is always correct (blue empirical CDF).
The almost perfect match to the theoretical CDF speaks to normally distributed estimates
of all M = 3 components of the mixture distribution.28 The cases where n < 10,000 relax
insistence on correct model specification and demonstrate that this is not an artifact of a
very large sample size. Here, η is the population pseudo-parameter in the (potentially)
SbTVA,κ
mispecified model. Even for rather moderate sample sizes (n = 3000), we see normally
distributed estimates.
3.2. Alternative Estimators. In what follows, we stick to the simulation framework pre-
sentedinSection3.1. WeprimarilymakethecaseforthestrongperformanceofTVArelative
to its most straightforward alternative, a direct application of OLS, by comparing the per-
formance of both estimators on a range of measures outlined in Section 3.1. Looking at
the various measures gives insight into what gives TVA its edge. In an extended simula-
tion section of our Online Appendix E.1 we provide comparisons for further LASSO-based
alternative estimation strategies, the results of which are summarized below.
3.2.1. Direct OLS. An intuitive route for inference in this setting is estimating the unique
policy specification (2.1) using only an application of OLS and nothing else (a strategy we
call “direct OLS”). Since this is a fully saturated regression, this estimator has no theoretical
issues with convergence nor with interpretation. Rather, this is about performance in the
finite sample in the environment we describe. Most obviously, there is a loss of power in
estimating, separately, the impact of 75 distinct interventions. Moreover, on the question
of selecting and estimating the best policy effects, it faces the following inadequacies: (1)
it fails at consistently identifying the minimum dosage best policy (2) the estimates of best
28For this exercise we use a single randomly chosen configuration C that determines the coefficients η ,
κ
κ∈{1,···M} against which to compare our estimates.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 22
policy exhibit a stronger winner’s curse (3) the attenuations from applying Andrews et al.
(2021) are large (and relative to TVA, overly severe).
Figure 3, panels B-D, which compare TVA and OLS on the relevant metrics, documents
patterns (1)-(3) for best policy estimation. Panel B plots inclusion accuracies as a function
of sample size, and speaks to pattern (1). Direct OLS (orange) does almost as well as TVA
in estimating as best policy some policy that is part of the true best pooled policy, but
it effectively picks the dosage at random; thus selection of the minimum dosage hovers at
around 36.67%.
Panels C, and D document patterns (2) and (3). The direct OLS results are in orange.
PanelCexhibitsastrongwinner’scurse,whichistobeexpectedinasituationwithnumerous
candidates for “best policy”, since the odds that a particularly large shock was drawn and
thrustonetothetopisquitehigh. TheattenuationresultingfromtheapplicationofAndrews
et al. (2021), as a result of this neck-and-neck competition, are also large; this is verified in
Panel C, and in fact shrinkage goes up to 89% in many individual simulations. These are
actually over-attenuated; indeed, as the Panel D plots of attenuated best policy MSE over
sample size show, a large MSE (of 0.52) persists even for large n.29 In contrast in all these
panels, the winner’s curse attenuations for TVA are much more modest, because of reduction
of the number of competing policies and therefore greater separation between them.
Besides the specific issue of best policy estimation, direct OLS has low power. This is
depicted in Figure 4, where simulated OLS estimates of all the unique policies (2.1) contrast
with the pruned and pooled estimation (2.2). As expected, the estimated effects of the
pooled policies are less dispersed (panel A). In this visualization, we deliberately choose
a configuration where the effects of different policies are similar, so that these histograms
overlap. This makes the task of discovering the correct way to pool an interesting challenge
(further exemplified in the direct OLS estimates of a single simulated draw of data in Panel
B, where 95%-confidence intervals of policies from distinct pools strongly overlap), and it
highlights the need of a disciplined procedure.
3.2.2. Naive LASSO. There are two ways we could “naively” apply LASSO. The first is to
disregard pooling, and apply LASSO on the unique policy specification (2.1) because sparse
dosages might also mean a sparse set of policies. While there is no theoretical issue with this
procedure in terms of model consistency, using this for policy estimation leads to much the
same performance limitations as direct OLS with regards to best policy estimation, namely
a persistently high best policy MSE stemming from overly severe correction from Andrews
et al. (2021)’s winner’s curse adjustment. Figure E.1 from our Online Appendix, contrasts
29Recall that while Andrews et al. (2021) estimators are consistent, this assumes some local separation of
parameters, which is not guaranteed in these neck-and-neck competitions.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 23
this “No pooling, only pruning” version of LASSO to TVA on best policy estimation and
documents these patterns in detail.
The second way to “naively” apply LASSO is to consider both pooling and pruning as im-
portant, butadoptasigninconsistentmodelselectionprocedurebyapplyingLASSOdirectly
on (2.4) without a Puffer transformation. As expected, simulations attest to inconsistent
support selection though MSE on the best policy is comparable to TVA. Importantly, it fails
to select the minimum dosage best policy with substantial probability relative to TVA (refer
to Figure E.2 in Online Appendix E, and related discussion for more details).
3.2.3. Debiased LASSO. Because we are interested in high dimensional inference30 one al-
ternative to a two step process of model selection and inference is the so-called “debiased
LASSO” (Zhang and Zhang (2014), Javanmard and Montanari (2014), Javanmard and Mon-
tanari(2018),VanDeGeer(2019)). ThebasicideaisthatsincethedownwardbiasinLASSO
is estimable, we can reverse it. A feature, however, is that these debiased coefficients are
almost surely never exactly zero, so that there is no question of sparsity. We thus only need
to consider applying debiased LASSO to (2.1).
InFigureE.3ofourOnlineAppendix, weshowthatthedebiasedLASSOproceduresuffers
from the same limitations as direct OLS estimation, especially with regards to best policy
estimation (high MSE due to over-attenuation of the winner’s curse).
3.2.4. “Off the Shelf” Bayesian approaches: Spike and Slab LASSO (Nie and Roˇckov´a, 2022).
The rules governing admissible pooling encodes the econometrician’s prior about the envi-
ronment. This raises the possibility of a Bayesian framework. Indeed, LASSO estimates
have a Bayesian interpretation in terms of Laplace priors. One can ask whether a more
sophisticated, “explicitly” Bayesian approach can address our final objectives. This paradig-
matically different route is the topic of future work. In Section E.1.3 of our Online Appendix,
we just show that“off the shelf” Bayesian approaches are unlikely to help. In particular, we
show that a direct application of spike and slab formulations – the most intuitively relevant
method – underperforms relative to our TVA procedure with a performance pattern similar
to that of applying Naive LASSO to the marginal specification (2.4).
3.3. Performance Under Five Sparsity Relaxation Regimes. Our main theoretical
guarantees in Section 2 hold in an environment with exact sparsity and with marginal effect
sizes uniformly bounded away from 0. Here we explore practical performance relaxing this
in several plausible ways. Although performance of TVA suffers, it is still strong; moreover,
as elaborated in section E.2 of our Online Appendix, TVA does better than the next best
practical alternative of applying naive LASSO to the marginal specification (2.4).
30Albeit, we are still in a K < n regime (mechanically since the number of treatments cannot exceed the
number of units), sometimes called low dimensional with diverging number of parameters.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 24
We consider five regimes of sparsity and effect size relaxations. Although the support
configurations are no longer necessarily of cardinality M, they are still randomly chosen as
in Section 3.1. In Regimes 1 and 2 we relax exact zeros in the non-primary marginals to
small effect sizes; these are either rapidly diminishing as Θ(1) (Regime 1) or moderately
n
diminishing as Θ(
√
1 ) (Regime 2).31 In Regime 3 we further relax sparsity in the first regime
n
by expanding the true support to include marginal effects of both large and medium sizes.
In Regime 4 we relax the lower bound on marginal effect sizes for the primary marginals,
diminishing at a rate Θ( 1 ) between moderate and rapid. In the fifth regime we further
n0.2
relax sparsity in Regime 4 by expanding the support with rapidly diminishing coefficients.
A summary of the regime configurations is described below:
(1) Regime 1: M constant marginal effect sizes in [1,5] & M rapidly diminishing re-
maining marginal effect sizes in [1,5]/n.
(2) Regime 2: M constant marginals in [1,5] & M moderately diminishing remaining
√
marginals ([1,5]/ n).
(3) Regime 3: M large constant marginals in [5,10], M medium marginals in [1,2] &
M rapidly diminishing remaining marginals in [1,5]/n.
(4) Regime 4: M decreasing marginals in [1,5]/n0.2 (and zero marginals everywhere
else).
(5) Regime 5: M decreasing marginals in [1,5]/n0.2 & M moderately diminishing re-
√
maining marginals in [1,5]/ n.
The main finding is that support accuracy of TVA is generally strong. Even in the case
of model misspecification, the MSE of the best policy is still low for moderate sample size.
Furthermore its distinct advantage relative to alternatives with regards to best policy esti-
mation — the much more reliable selection of the minimum dosage best policy — remains
equally strong.
Figure5, panelAspeakstothefirstpattern: evenifsupportaccuracysuffersfromrelaxing
sparsity requirements performance remains generally high. For regimes 1-3 for example, sup-
port accuracy converges to 100% albeit more slowly than in the exactly sparse environment
(and convergence in R2 is, as expected, slower than in R1). For regimes 4 and 5, even though
TVA is support inconsistent, this does not imply a higher MSE of the best policy demon-
strating that model misspecification is not generally threatening with regards to this final
objective. Panel B shows this very clearly where MSE is steadily decreasing and comparable
across all regimes. Performance on some best policy selection — the easier task — seems also
particularly unaffected by the sparsity relaxations, with accuracy ranging between 80%-90%
(panel C). Finally TVA’s distinctive advantage over all alternatives explored in Section 3.2
is the reliable selection of the minimum dosage best policy. Performance on minimum best
31Note that only a diminishing rate retains a threat of misspecified model selection at any n

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 25
policy selection remains generally strong across regimes (panel D) with a steady increase as
sample size grows. Notably the minimum best inclusion rate is above 90% across all regimes
for even moderate sample sizes (n = 3000).
Taken together, these simulation results make the case that TVA is both a powerful and
robust candidate for our setting.
4. Context, Experimental Design, and Data
We now apply this method to a large-scale experiment conducted in collaboration with
the government of Haryana to help them select the most effective policy bundle to stimulate
demand for immunization. The objective of the experiment was explicitly to select the best
policy to scale up, after one year-long experiment with 75 potentially distinct treatments,
making it an excellent setting for this method.
4.1. Context. ThisstudytookplaceinHaryana, apopulousstateinNorthIndia, bordering
New Delhi. In India, a child between 12 and 23 months is considered to be fully immunized
if he or she receives one dose of BCG, three doses of Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV), three doses
of DPT, and at least one dose of a measles vaccination. India is one of the countries where
immunization rates are puzzlingly low. According to the 2015-2016 National Family Health
Survey, only 62% of children were fully immunized (NFHS, 2016). This is not due to lack of
access to vaccines or health personnel. The Universal Immunization Program (UIP) provides
all vaccines free of cost to beneficiaries, and vaccines are delivered in rural areas–even in the
most remote villages. Immunization services have made considerable progress over the past
few years and are much more reliably available than they used to be. During the course of
our study we found that the monthly scheduled immunization session were almost always
run in each village.
The central node of the UIP is the Primary Health Centre (PHC). PHCs are health
facilities that provide health services to an average of 25 rural and semi-urban villages with
about 500 households each. Under each PHC, there are approximately four sub-centres
(SCs). Vaccines are stored and transported from the PHCs to either sub-centers or villages
on an appointed day each month, where there is a mobile clinic where the Auxiliary Nurse
Midwife (ANM) administers vaccines to all eligible children. A local health worker, the
Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA), is meant to help map eligible households, inform
and motivate parents, and take them to the immunization session. She receives a small fee
for each shot given to a child in her village.
Despite this elaborate infrastructure, immunization rates are particularly low in North
India, especially in Haryana. According to the District Level Household and Facility Survey,

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 26
the full immunization coverage among 12-23 months-old children in Haryana fell from 60%
in 2007-08 to 52.1% in 2012-13 (DLHS, 2013).
In the district where we carried out the study, a baseline study revealed even lower im-
munization rates (the seven districts that were selected were chosen because they have low
immunization). About 86% of the children (aged 12-23 months) had received at least three
vaccines. However, the share of children whose parents had reported they received the
measles vaccine (the last in the sequence) was 39%, and only 19.4% had received the vaccine
before the age of 15 months, while the full sequence is supposed to be completed in one year.
After several years focused on improving the supply of immunization services, the govern-
ment of Haryana was interested in testing out strategies to improve household take-up of
immunization, and in particular, their completion of the full immunization schedule. With
support from USAID and the Gates Foundation, they entered into a partnership with J-PAL
to test out different interventions. The final objective was to pick the best policy possibly
scale up throughout the state.
Our study took place in seven districts where immunization was particularly low. In
four districts, the full immunization rate in a cohort of children older than the ones we
consider, was below 40%, as reported by parents (which is likely a large overestimate of the
actual immunization rate, given that children get other kinds of shots and parents often
find it hard to distinguish between them, as noted in Banerjee et al. (2021)). Together, the
districts cover a population of more than 8 million (8,280,591) in more than 2360 villages,
served by 140 PHCs and 755 SCs. The study covered all these PHCs and SCs, and are
thus fully representative of the seven districts. Given the scale of the project, our first step
was to build a platform to keep a record of all immunizations. Sana, an MIT-based health
technology group, built a simple m-health application that the ANMs used to register and
record information about every child who attended at least one camp in the sample villages.
Children were given a unique ID that made it possible to track them across visits and
centers. Overall, 295,038 unique children were recorded in the system, and 471,608 vaccines
were administered. Data from this administrative database is our main source of information
on immunization and we discuss its reliability below. More details on the implementation
are provided in the publicly available progress report (Banerjee et al., 2021).
4.2. Interventions. The study evaluates the impact of several nudges on the demand for
immunization: small incentives, targeted reminders, and local ambassadors.
4.2.1. Incentives. When households are indifferent or have a propensity to procrastinate,
small incentives can offset any short term cost of getting to an immunization camp and
lead to a large effect on immunization. Banerjee et al. (2010) shows that small incentives for
immunizationinRajasthan(abagoflentilsforeachshotandasetofplatesforcompletingthe
course)ledtoalargeincreaseintheratesofimmunization. Similarresultsweresubsequently

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 27
obtained in other countries, suggesting that incentives tend to be effective (Bassani et al.,
2013; Gibson et al., 2017). In the Indian health system, households receive incentives for a
number of health behavior, including hospital delivery, pre-natal care visits, and, in some
states (like Tamil Nadu), immunization.
The Haryana government was interested in experimenting with incentives. The incentives
that were chosen were mobile recharges for pre-paid phones, which can be done cheaply
and reliably on a very large scale. Almost all families have at least one phone and the
overwhelming majority of the phones are pre-paid. Mobile phone credits are of uniform
quality and fixed price, which greatly simplify procurement and delivery.
A small value of mobile phone credit was given to the caregivers each time they brought
their child to get immunized. Any child under the age of 12 months receiving one of the five
eligible shots (i.e., BCG, Penta-1, Penta-2, Penta-3, or Measles-1), was considered eligible
for the incentives intervention. Mobile recharges were delivered directly to the caregivers’
phone number that they provided at the immunization camp. Seventy (out of the 140) PHCs
were randomly selected to receive the incentives treatment.
In Banerjee et al. (2010), only one reward schedule was experimented with. It involved a
flat reward for each shot plus a set of plates for completing the immunization program. This
left many important policy questions pending: does the level of incentive make a difference?
If not, cheaper incentives could be used. Should the level of rewards increase with each
immunization to offset the propensity of the household to drop out later in the program?
To answer these questions, we varied the level of incentives and whether they increased
over the course of the immunization program. The randomization was carried out within
each PHC, at the subcenter level. Depending on which sub-center the caregiver fell under,
she would either receive a:
(1) Flat incentive, high: INR 90 ($1.34 at the 2016 exchange rate, $4.50 at PPP) per
immunization (INR 450 total).
(2) Sloped incentive, high: INR 50 for each of the first three immunizations, 100 for the
fourth, 200 for the fifth (INR 450 total).
(3) Flat incentive, low: INR 50 per payment (INR 250 total).
(4) Sloped incentive, low: INR 10 for each of the first three immunizations, 60 for the
fourth, 160 for the fifth (INR 250 total).
Even the high incentive levels here are small and therefore implementable at scale, but
they still constitute a non-trivial amount for the households. The “high” incentive level was
chosen to be roughly equivalent to the level of incentive chosen in the Rajasthan study: INR
90 was roughly the cost of a kilogram of lentils in Haryana during our study period. The
low level was meant to be half of that (rounded to INR 50 since the vendor could not deliver
recharges that were not multiple of 10). This was meaningful to the households: INR 50

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 28
corresponds to 100 minutes of talk time on average. The provision of incentives was linked
to each vaccine. If a child missed a dose, for example Penta-1, but then came for the next
vaccine (in this case, measles), they would receive both Penta-1 and measles and get the
incentives for both at once, as per the schedule described above.
To diffuse the information on incentives, posters were provided to ANMs, who were asked
to put them up when they set up for each immunization session. The village ASHAs and
the ANMs were also supposed to inform potential beneficiaries of the incentive structure and
amount in the relevant villages. However, there was no systematic large scale information
campaign, and it is possible that not everybody was aware of the presence or the schedule
of the incentives, particularly if they had never gone to a camp.
4.2.2. Reminders. Another frequently proposed method to increase immunization is to send
text message reminders to parents. Busy parents have limited attention and reminders can
put the immunization back at the “top of the mind.” Moreover, parents do not necessarily
understand that the last immunization in the schedule (measles) is for a different disease and
is at least as important as the previous ones. SMSs are also extremely cheap and easy to
administer in a population with widespread access to cell phones. Even if not everyone gets
the message, the diffusion may be reinforced by social learning, leading to faster adoption.32
The potential for SMS reminders is recognized in India. The Indian Academy of Pediatrics
rolled out a program in which parents could enroll to get reminders by providing their cell
phone number and their child’s date of birth. Supported by the Government of India, the
platform planned to enroll 20 million children by the end of 2020.
Indeed, text messages have already been shown to be effective to increase immunization
in some contexts. For example, a systematic review of five RCTs finds that reminders for
immunization increase take up on average (Mekonnen et al., 2019). However, it remains true
that text messages could have no effect or even backfire if parents do not understand the
information provided and feel they have no one to ask (Banerjee et al., 2018). Targeted text
and voice call reminders were sent to the caregivers to remind them that their child was due
to receive a specific shot. To identify any potential spillover to the rest of the network, this
intervention followed a two step randomization. First, we randomized the study sub-centers
into three groups: no reminders, 33% reminders, and 66% reminders. Second, after their first
visit to that sub-center, children’s families were randomly assigned to either get the reminder
or not, with a probability corresponding to the treatment group for their sub-centers. The
children were assigned to receive/not receive reminders on a rolling basis.
32See,e.g.,Rogers(1995);Krackhardt(1996);Kempe,Kleinberg,andTardos(2003);Jackson(2008);Iyengar,
denBulte,andValente(2010);Hinz,Skiera,Barrot,andBecker(2011);Katona,Zubcsek,andSarvary(2011);
Jackson and Yariv (2011); Banerjee, Chandrasekhar, Duflo, and Jackson (2013); Bloch and Tebaldi (2016);
Jackson (2017); Akbarpour, Malladi, and Saberi (2017).

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 29
The following text reminders were sent to the beneficiaries eligible to receive a reminder.
In addition, to make sure that the message would reach illiterate parents, the same message
was sent through an automated voice call.
(1) Reminders in incentive-treatment PHCs:
“Hello! It is time to get the «name of vaccine» vaccine administered for your
child «name». Please visit your nearest immunization camp to get this vaccine
and protect your child from diseases. You will receive mobile credit worth «range
for slope or fixed amount for flat» as a reward for immunizing your child.”
(2) Reminders in incentive-control PHCs:
“Hello! Itistimetogetthe«nameofvaccine»vaccineadministeredforyourchild.
Please visit your nearest immunization camp to get this vaccine and protect your
child from diseases.”
4.2.3. The Immunization Ambassador: Network-Based Seeding. The goal of the ambassador
intervention was to leverage the social network to spread information. The objective was
to identify influential individuals who could relay to villagers both the information on the
existence of the immunization camps, and, wherever relevant, the information that incen-
tives were available. Existing evidence shows that people who have a high centrality in a
network (e.g., they have many friends who themselves have many friends) are able to spread
information more widely in the community (Katz and Lazarsfeld, 1955; Aral and Walker,
2012; Banerjee et al., 2013; Beaman et al., 2018; Banerjee et al., 2019). Further, members
in the social network are able to easily identify individuals, whom we call information hubs,
who are the best placed to diffuse information as a result of their centrality as well other
personal characteristics (social mindedness, garrulousness, etc.)(Banerjee et al., 2019).
This intervention took place in a subset of 915 villages where we collected a full census
of the population (see below for data sources). Seventeen respondents in each village were
randomly sampled from the census to participate in the survey, and were asked to identify
people with certain characteristics (more about those later). Within each village, the six
people nominated most often by the group of 17 were recruited to be ambassadors for the
program. Iftheyagreed, ashortsurveywasconductedtocollectsomedemographicvariables,
and they were then formally asked to become program ambassadors. Specifically, they
agreed to receive one text message and one voice call every month, and to relay it to their
friends. In villages without incentives, the text message was a bland reminder of the value of
immunization. Invillageswithincentives, thetextmessagefurtherremindedtheambassador
(and hence potentially their contacts) that there was an incentive for immunization.
While our previous research had shown that villagers can reliably identify information
hubs, apertinentquestionforpolicyunansweredbypreviousworkiswhethertheinformation

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 30
hubs can effectively transmit messages about health, where trust in the messengers may be
more important than in the case of more commercial messages.
There were four groups of ambassador villages, which varied in the type of people that
the 17 surveyed households were asked to identify. The full text is in Appendix K.
(1) Random seeds: In this treatment arm, we did not survey villages. We picked six
ambassadors randomly from the census.
(2) Information hub seed: Respondents were asked to identify who is good at relaying
information.
(3) Trusted seed: Respondents were asked to identify those who are generally trusted to
provide good advice about health or agricultural questions
(4) Trusted information hub seed: Respondentswereaskedtoidentifywhoisbothtrusted
and good at transmitting information
4.3. Experimental Design. The government was interested in selecting the best policy,
or bundle of policies, for possible future scale up. We were agnostic as to the relative
merits of the many available variants. For example, we did not know whether the incentive
level was going to be important, nor did we know if the villagers would be able to identify
trusted people effectively and hence, whether the intervention to select trusted people as
ambassadors would work. However, we believed that there could be significant interactions
between different policies. For example, our prior was that the ambassador intervention was
going to work more effectively in villages with incentives, because the message to diffuse was
clear. We therefore implemented a completely cross-randomized design, as illustrated in our
Online Appendix Figure G.1.
We started with 2,360 villages, covered by 140 PHCs, and 755 sub-centers. The 140 PHCs
were randomly divided into 70 incentives PHCs, and 70 no incentives PHCs (stratifying
by district). Within the 70 incentives PHCs, we randomly selected the sub-centers to be
allocated to each of the four incentive sub-treatment arms. Finally, we only had resources to
conduct a census and a baseline exercise in about 900 villages. We selected about half of the
villages from the coverage area of each subcenter, after excluding the smallest villages. Only
among the 915 villages did we conduct the ambassador randomization: after stratifying by
sub-center, we randomly allocated the 915 villages to the control group (no ambassador) or
one of the four ambassador treatment groups.
In total, we had one control group, four types of incentives interventions, four types of
ambassador interventions, and two types of SMS interventions. Since they were fully cross-
randomized (in the sample of 915 villages), we had 75 potential policies, which is large even
in relation to our relatively large sample size. Our goal is to identify the most effective and
cost-effective policies and to provide externally valid estimates of the best policy’s impact,
after accounting for the winner’s curse problem. Further, we want like to identify other

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 31
effective policies and answer the question of whether different variants of the policy had the
same or different impacts.
4.4. Data.
4.4.1. Census and Baseline. In the absence of a comprehensive sampling frame, we con-
ducted a mapping and census exercise across 915 villages falling within the 140 sample
PHCs. To conduct the census, we visited 328,058 households, of which 62,548 households
satisfied our eligibility criterion (children aged 12 to 18 months). These exercises were car-
ried out between May and November 2015. The data from the census was used to sample
eligible households for a baseline survey. We also used the census to sample the respondent
of the ambassador identification survey (and to sample the ambassadors in the “random
seed” villages). Around 15 households per village were sampled, resulting in data on 14,760
households and 17,000 children. The baseline survey collected data on demographic charac-
teristics, immunization history, attitudes and knowledge and was conducted between May
and July 2016. A village-level summary of baseline survey data is given in Appendix J.
4.4.2. Outcome Data. Our outcomes of interest are the number of vaccines administered for
each vaccine every month, and the number of fully immunized children every month. The
main analysis of this paper focuses on the number of children who received the measles
vaccines in each village every month. The measles vaccine is the last vaccine in the immu-
nization schedule, and the ANMs check the immunization history and administer missing
vaccines when a child is brought in for this vaccine. As a result, it is a good proxy for a
child being fully immunized.
For our analysis, we use administrative data collected by the ANM using the e-health
application on the tablet, stored on the server, to measure immunization. At the first visit,
achildwasregisteredusingagovernmentprovidedID(orinitsabsence,aprogram-generated
ID) and past immunization history, if any. In subsequent visits, the unique ID was used to
pull-up the child’s details and update the data. Over the course of the program, about
295,038 children were registered, yielding a record of 471,608 immunizations. We use the
data from December 2016 to November 2017. We do this because of a technical glitch in the
system–the SMS intervention was discontinued from November 2017, although the incentives
and information hub interventions were continued a little longer, through March 2018.
Since this data was also used to trigger SMS reminders and incentives, and for the govern-
ment to evaluate the nurses’ performance,33 it was important to assess its accuracy. Hence,
we conducted a validation exercise, comparing the administrative data with random checks,
as described in Appendix I. The data quality appears to be excellent. Finally, one concern
33Aggregated monthly reports generated from this data replaced the monthly reports previously compiled
by hand by the nurses.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 32
(particularly with the incentive program) is that the intervention led to a pattern of sub-
stitution, with children who would have been immunized elsewhere (in the PHC or at the
hospital) choosing to be immunized in the camp instead. To address this issue, we collected
data immediately after the intervention on a sample of children who did not appear in the
database(identifiedthroughacensusexercise), toascertainthestatusoftheirimmunization.
In Appendix H, we show that there does not appear to be a pattern of substitution, as these
children were not more likely to be immunized elsewhere.
Below, the dependent variable is the number of measles shot given in a village in a month
(each month, one immunization session is held at each site). On average, in the entire
sample, 6.16 measles shot were delivered per village every month (5.29 in the villages with
no intervention at all). In the sample at risk for the ambassador intervention (which is our
sample for this study) 6.94 shots per village per month were delivered.
4.5. Interventions Average Effects. In this section, we present the average effects of the
interventions using a standard regression without interactions.
We focus on the sample of census villages used throughout our analysis - which are the
villages where the ambassador intervention was also administered - and run the following
specification:
y = α+β0Incentive +γ0SMS +δ0Ambassador +υ +(cid:15) .
dsvt s s v dt dsvt
We weight these village-level regressions by village population, and standard errors are clus-
tered at the SC level.34
Theresults(alreadyreportedinBanerjeeetal.(2019))aredepictedgraphicallyinFigure6
and show that, on average, using information hubs (“gossips” in that paper) as ambassadors
has positive effects on immunization: 1.89 more children receive a measles vaccine on a base
of 7.32 in control in this sample (p = 0.04). This is nearly identical to the effect of the high-
powered, sloped incentive, though this intervention is considerably cheaper. In contrast,
none of the other ambassador treatments–random seeding, seeding with trusted individuals,
orseedingwithtrustedinformationhubs–havebenefitsstatisticallydistinguishablefromzero
(p = 0.42, p = 0.63, and p = 0.92 respectively) and the point estimates are small, as well.
To ensure that conclusions are not simply an artifact of this particular subsample, we show
in Appendix G that these results are robust to running the analysis on the full sample, .
The conclusion from this analysis is that financial incentives can be effective to boost
demand for immunization, but only if they are large enough and increase with each im-
munization. Of the two cheaper interventions, the SMS interventions, promoted widely in
India and elsewhere, seem disappointing. In contrast, leveraging the community by enrolling
34This is the highest level at which a treatment is administered, so clustering at this level should yield the
most conservative estimate of variance. In practice clustering at the village level or SC level does not make
an appreciable difference.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 33
local ambassadors, selected using the cheap procedure of asking a few villages who are good
information hubs, seems to be as effective as using incentives. It leads to an increase of
26% in the number of children who complete the schedule of immunization every month.
This alone could increase full immunization rate in those districts from 39% (our baseline
full immunization rate, as reported by parents) to nearly 49%. This analysis does not fully
answer the policymaker’s question, however. It could well be that the interventions have
powerful interactions with each other, which has two implications. First, the main effect,
as estimated, does not tell us what the impact of the policy would be in Haryana if imple-
mented alone (because as it is, they are a weighted average of a complicated set of interacted
treatments). Second, it is possible that the government could do better by combining two (or
more) interventions. For example, our prior in designing the information hub ambassador
intervention (described in our proposal for the project)35 was that it would have a positive
interaction effect with incentives, because it would be much easier for the information hubs
to relay hard information (there are incentives) than a vaguer message that immunization is
useful. The problem, however, is that there are a large number of interventions and interac-
tions: we did not—nor was it feasible to—think through ex-ante all of the interactions that
should or should not be included, which is why in Banerjee et al. (2019), we only reported
the average effects of each different type of seeds in the entire sample, without interactions.
In the next section, we adapt our disciplined approach to select which ones to include, and
to then estimate the impact of the “best” policy.
5. Results
5.1. Identifying effective policies.
5.1.1. Method. We adapt the TVA procedure for our case. We allow only some pooling
within arms depending on the nature of the sub-treatment. In the incentive arms, slope and
flatincentivesarenotallowedtopool, buttheamountofmoney(highorlow)isconsideredto
be a dosage. In the ambassador arms, we do not allow pooling between random selection of
ambassadors, trusted ambassador, and information hub. Within information hubs, however,
we consider that the “trusted information hub” is an increased dosage of information hub,
so these may pool with one another.
To summarize, interventions “information hubs,” “slope,” “flat,” and “SMS” are found in
two intensities. The marginal specification (2.4) therefore looks like
y = α +α SMS +α High SMS
dsvt 0 SMS s H,SMS s
+α Slope +α High Slope +α Flat +α High Flat
Slope s H,Slope s Flat s H,Flat s
35https://doi.org/10.1257/rct.1434-4.0

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 34
+α Random +α Info Hub (All) +α Trust +α Trusted Info Hub
R v H v T v TH v
+α0 X +v +(cid:15) ,
X sv dt dsvt
where we have explicitly listed the variables in “single arm” treatment profiles. X is a
sv
vector of the remaining 64 marginal effects variables in “multiple arm” treatment profiles,
and v is a set of district-time dummies. Here SMS refers to “any SMS”.
dt
Our model selection estimation follows the recommended implementation in Rohe (2014),
which uses a sequential backward elimination version of LASSO (variables with p-values
above some threshold are progressively deselected) on the Puffer transformed variables
N
(this aids in correcting for the heteroskedasticity induced by the Puffer transformation). We
select penalties λ for both regressions (number of immunizations and immunizations per
dollar) to minimize a Type I error, which is particularly important to avoid in the case of
policy implementation.36 This makes sense because it is extremely problematic to have a
government introduce a large policy based on a false positive. This reasoning is elaborated
in Appendix D.
This gives Sb , an estimate of the true support set S of the marginal effects specification
α α
(2.4). We then generate a use of unique pooled policy set Sb (following the procedure we
TVA
outline in Algorithm 2 in Appendix B). Next, we run the pooled specification (2.2) to obtain
post-LASSO estimates ηˆ of the pooled policies as well as ηˆhyb , the winner’s curse
SbTVA SbTVA,κˆ?
adjusted estimate of the best policy.
5.1.2. Results. The results are presented in Figure 7. Panel A presents the post-LASSO
estimates where the outcome variable is the number of measles vaccines per month in the
village. Panel B presents the post-LASSO estimates where the outcome variable is the
number of measles vaccines per dollar spent. In each, a relatively small subset of policies
is selected as part of Sb out of the universe of 75 granular policies (16% of the possible
TVA
options in Panel A and 35% in Panel B).
In Figure 7, Panel A, two of the four selected pooled policies are estimated to do signif-
icantly better than control: information hubs seeding with sloped incentives (of both low
and high intensities) and SMS reminders (of both 33% and 66% saturation) are estimated
to increase the number of immunizations by 55% relative to control (p = 0.001), while
trusted seeds with high-sloped incentives and SMS reminders (of both saturation levels) are
estimated to increase immunizations by 44% relative to control (p = 0.009).
These two effective policies increase the number of immunizations, relative to the status
quo, at the cost of a greater cost for each immunization (compared to standard policy).
36Rohe (2014) notes a bijection between a backwards elimination procedure based on using Type I error
thresholds and the penalty in LASSO. We take λ = 0.48 and λ = 0.0014 for the number of immunizations
and immunizations per dollar outcomes, respectively. Both of these choices map to the same Type I error
value (p = 5×10−13) used in the backwards elimination implementation of LASSO selected to essentially
eliminate false positives. Appendix D elaborates on this choice.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 35
These policies induce 36.0 immunizations per village per month per $1,000 allocation (as
compared with 43.6 immunizations per village per month in control). The reason is that
that the gains from having incentives in terms of immunization rates is smaller than the
increase in costs (e.g., the incentives must be paid to all the infra-marginal parents).
Two things are worth noting to qualify those results, however. First, in Chernozhukov
et al. (2018), we show that in the places where the full package treatment is predicted to
be the most effective (which tends to be the places with low immunization), the number of
immunizations per dollar spent is not statistically different in treatment and control villages.
Second, immunization is so cost-effective, that this relatively small increase in the cost of
immunization may still mean a much more cost-effective use of funds than the next best use
of dollars on policies to fight childhood disease (Ozawa et al., 2012).
Nevertheless, a government may be interested in the most cost-effective policy, if they have
a given budget for immunization. We turn to policy cost effectiveness in Figure 7, Panel
B. The most cost-effective policy (and the only policy that reduces per immunization cost)
compared to control is the combination of information hub seeding (trusted or not) with
SMS reminders (at both 33% or 66% saturation) and no incentives, which leads to a 9.1%
increase in vaccinations per dollar (p = 0.000).
5.2. Estimating the Impact of the Best policy. To estimate the impact of the best
policy, we first select the best policy from Sb based on the post-LASSO estimate. Then,
TVA
we attenuate it using the hybrid estimator with α = 0.05 and β = α = 0.005, which this
10
is the value used by Andrews et al. (2021) in their simulations. The hybrid confidence
interval has the following interpretation: conditional on policy effects falling within a 99.5%
simultaneous confidence interval, the hybrid confidence interval around the best policy has
at least 95% coverage. It also has at least 95% coverage unconditionally.37
Table 1 presents the results. In column 1, the outcome variable is the number of measles
vaccines given every month in a given village. We find that for the best policy in the
sample (information hub seeds with sloped incentives at any level and SMS reminders at
any saturation) the hybrid estimated best policy effect relative to control is 3.26 with a
95% hybrid confidence interval of [0.032,6.25]. This is lower than the original post-LASSO
estimated effect of 4.02. The attenuation is owing to a second best policy (trusted seeds
with high sloped incentives with SMS reminders at any saturation), chasing the best policy
estimate somewhat closely.38 Nevertheless, even accounting for winner’s curse through the
attenuated estimates and the adjusted confidence intervals, the hybrid estimates still reject
37Per Proposition 6 of Andrews et al. (2021), it has unconditionial coverage between 1−α = 95% and
1−α =95.58%.
1−β
38The increased attenuation from a more closely competing second-best policy emerges from the formulas
for conditional inference given in Section 3 of Andrews et al. (2021).

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 36
the null. Thus, the conclusion is that accounting for winner’s curse, this policy increases
immunizations by 44% relative to control.
While policymakers may chose this policy if they are willing to bear a higher cost to
increase immunization, there may be settings where cost effectiveness is an important con-
sideration. In column 2, the outcome variable is the number of vaccinations per dollar.
Accounting for winner’s curse through hybrid estimation, for the best policy of information
hubs (all variants) and SMS reminders (any saturation level), the hybrid estimated best pol-
icy effect relative to control is 0.004 with a 95% hybrid confidence interval of [0.003,0.004].
Notably,thisappearsalmostunchangedfromthenaivepost-LASSO.Thisisbecausenoother
pooled policy with positive effect is “chasing” the best policy in the sample; the second-best
policy is the control (status quo), which is sufficiently separated from the best policy so as
to have an insignificant adjustment for winner’s curse. Thus, adjusting for winner’s curse,
this policy increases the immunizations per dollar by 9.1% relative to control.
One concern with these estimates may be that they are sensitive to the implied LASSO
penalty λ chosen. To check the robustness of our results, we consider alternative values of λ.
However, wealsoneedacriteriaforevaluatingresultsundervariousλsinceamarginaleffects
support will never be robust for the whole range of λ. Appendix D spells out this criteria,
which amounts to formulating a set of “admissible” λ for the practitioner. In a nutshell, the
criterion is to avoid including in Sb first and second best policies that are very likely to be
α
false positives. Including a false positive as the first best is obviously the most serious error
in the context of policy advising, but it also matters for the second best, since including
these in the support may overly attenuate the best policy estimate for winner’s curse. In
our case, we find that for both immunizations and immunizations per dollar, the winner’s
curse adjusted estimates are robust for their respective sets of admissible λ. To exemplify
this robustness, we can take the union of confidence intervals within their admissible sets.
This is [0.32,6.25] for immunizations and [0.001,0.006] for immunizations per dollar. Neither
is much wider than the single confidence interval for the choice of λ we highlight.
Though admissible λ are on a different scale for the two outcomes, there is a sense in which
the admissible set is larger for immunizations per dollar. This suggests a different kind of
robustness concern which is more about the relative fragility of the TVA estimator for each
of the outcomes. We can speak to this fragility using a bootstrapping analysis described in
detail in our Online Appendix F. Intuitively, it captures stability of best policy estimation
in terms of observation leverage, where conclusions driven by outliers will fare worse. In
this analysis, the best policy for cost-effectiveness holds for 96% with highly concentrated
estimates around the main one in actual data. Meanwhile, the best policy for immunization
holds for 77% of bootstrapped samples with estimates more widely dispersed. This speaks
to the relative stability of the best policy for cost effectiveness over that for immunizations.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 37
6. Conclusion
Despite immunization being one of the most effective and cost-effective methods to pre-
vent disease, disability, and mortality, millions of children each year go unvaccinated. The
COVID-19 epidemic has made the situation worse: vaccine coverage has dipped to levels not
seen since the 1990s (Bill and Melinda Gates, 2020). Swift policy action is critical to ensure
that this dip is temporary and children who missed immunizations during the pandemic get
covered soon.
In rural India, there was a priori reason to believe that nudges may work. After all, many
children get their first vaccines but caregivers rarely follow through. This is consistent with
thevastmajorityofcaregiversreportingthatvaccinesarehelpful. Yet, itwasaprioriunclear
as to which nudge, let alone which policy bundle out of the 75 candidates, would be effective.
Respectingthisgenuineuncertaintywascritical. Ifwehadsimplydoneparalleltreatments
ofincentives, reminders, andambassadors, wemighthavefoundnoeffects. Ourkeyfindingis
thatcombinedinterventionsworkbetterthaneachinisolation. Althoughthereistemptation
of paring down the number of treatments a priori for the sake of power, there is a danger
in not doing this in a data-driven way. The suggestion of avoiding all interactions in this
setting (made in Muralidharan et al. (2019)) would have led to the conclusion that nothing
is effective.
Additionally, theinteractioneffectsidentifiedbyTVAteachussomethingabouttheworld.
From the point of view of public health policy it tells us that it is valuable to add network-
based insights (information hubs), which are not in a typical policymaker’s toolkit, to cat-
alyze the effects of conventional instruments. From a basic research perspective, it also
suggests that the information hubs, i.e. the person best placed in a village to circulate in-
formation, may be more effective when they have something concrete to talk about, such as
incentives or something to explain such as SMSs. Such questions merit future research.
The method suggested here is applicable to many domains where policymakers have sev-
eral arms with multiple potential doses, do not have the time or capacity to adaptively
experiment, or have genuine uncertainty about which policy bundles should be effective.
Rather than guessing, or pretending to be an oracle, we suggest that policymakers consider
the data-driven approach of treatment variant aggregation which may apply to their set-
ting. The proposed method relies on strong assumptions that rule out some of the cases
where model-selection leads to invalid inferences. Provided these assumptions are palatable,
our findings show that TVA prunes and pools effectively and, thispays dividends when the
policymaker wishes to adjust for the winner’s curse without falling into the trap of over-
conservatism. The algorithm can be easily pre-specified and does not require the researcher
to take a stance on the possible effects of myriad interactions which are likely difficult to
predict in advance.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 38
References
Akbarpour, M., S. Malladi, and A. Saberi(2017): “Diffusion, Seeding, andtheValue
of Network Information,” Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3062830. 32
Alatas, V., A. G. Chandrasekhar, M. Mobius, B. A. Olken, and C. Paladines
(2019): “When Celebrities Speak: A Nationwide Twitter Experiment Promoting Vaccina-
tion In Indonesia,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research. 8
Andrews, I., T. Kitagawa, and A. McCloskey (2021): “Inference on winners,” Tech.
rep. 1, 1, 2.1.2, 2.4, 20, 2.4.2, 2.4.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 29, 5.2, 37, 38, ??, D, E.1.1, E.1, F
Aral, S. and D. Walker (2012): “Creatingsocialcontagionthroughviralproductdesign:
A randomized trial of peer influence in networks,” Management Science. 4.2.3
Banerjee, A., E. Breza, A. G. Chandrasekhar, and B. Golub (2018): “When Less
is More: Experimental Evidence on Information Delivery During India’s Demonetization,”
Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research. 4.2.2
Banerjee, A., A. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, S. Dalpath, J. Floretta, M. Jack-
son, H. Kannan, A. Schrimpf, and M. Shrestha (2021): “Evaluating the impact
of interventions to improve full immunisation rates in Haryana, India,” . 4.1
Banerjee, A., A. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and M. O. Jackson(2013): “Diffusion
of Microfinance,” Science, 341, DOI: 10.1126/science.1236498, July 26 2013. 32, 4.2.3
Banerjee, A., A. G. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and M. O. Jackson(2019): “Using
Gossips to Spread Information: Theory and Evidence from Two Randomized Controlled
Trials,” The Review of Economic Studies. 8, 4.2.3, 4.5
Banerjee, A. V., E. Duflo, R. Glennerster, and D. Kothari (2010): “Improv-
ing immunisation coverage in rural India: clustered randomised controlled evaluation of
immunisation campaigns with and without incentives,” Bmj, 340, c2220. 5, 4.2.1
Bassani, D. G., P. Arora, K. Wazny, M. F. Gaffey, L. Lenters, and Z. A.
Bhutta (2013): “Financial incentives and coverage of child health interventions: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis,” BMC Public Health, 13, S30. 5, 4.2.1
Beaman, L., A. BenYishay, J. Magruder, and A. M. Mobarak (2018): “Can net-
work theory-based targeting increase technology adoption?” Tech. rep., National Bureau
of Economic Research. 4.2.3
Berk, R., L. Brown, A. Buja, K. Zhang, and L. Zhao (2013): “Valid post-selection
inference,” The Annals of Statistics, 802–837. 2.4.1
Bickel, P. J., Y. Ritov, and A. B. Tsybakov (2009): “Simultaneous analysis of Lasso
and Dantzig selector,” The Annals of statistics, 37, 1705–1732. 2.2
Bill and F. Melinda Gates (2020): “COVID-19: A Global Perspective: 2020 Goalkeep-
ers Report,” . 6

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 39
Bloch, Francis and, M. O. and P. Tebaldi (2016): “Centrality Measures in Net-
works,” http://ssrn.com/abstract=2749124. 32
Chernozhukov, V., M. Demirer, E. Duflo, and I. Fernandez-Val (2018):
“Generic machine learning inference on heterogenous treatment effects in randomized ex-
periments,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research. 5.1.2
Chernozhukov, V., C. Hansen, and M. Spindler (2015): “Post-selection and post-
regularization inference in linear models with many controls and instruments,” American
Economic Review, 105, 486–90. E.2
DLHS (2013): “District Level Household and Facility Survey-4,” . 4.1
Domek, G. J., I. L. Contreras-Roldan, S. T. O’Leary, S. Bull, A. Furniss,
A. Kempe, and E. J. Asturias (2016): “SMS text message reminders to improve
infant vaccination coverage in Guatemala: A pilot randomized controlled trial,” Vaccine,
34, 2437–2443. 6
Easterly, W. (2014): The tyranny of experts: Economists, dictators, and the forgotten
rights of the poor, Basic Books. 1
Gibson, D. G., B. Ochieng, E. W. Kagucia, J. Were, K. Hayford, L. H. Moul-
ton, O. S. Levine, F. Odhiambo, K. L. O’Brien, and D. R. Feikin(2017): “Mobile
phone-deliveredremindersandincentivestoimprovechildhoodimmunisationcoverageand
timeliness in Kenya (M-SIMU): a cluster randomised controlled trial,” The Lancet Global
Health, 5, e428–e438. 5, 4.2.1
Hadad, V., D. A. Hirshberg, R. Zhan, S. Wager, and S. Athey (2021): “Confi-
dence intervals for policy evaluation in adaptive experiments,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 118, e2014602118. 1
Hammer, S. M., K. E. Squires, M. D. Hughes, J. M. Grimes, L. M. Demeter,
J. S. Currier, J. J. Eron Jr, J. E. Feinberg, H. H. Balfour Jr, L. R. Dey-
ton, et al. (1997): “A controlled trial of two nucleoside analogues plus indinavir in
persons with human immunodeficiency virus infection and CD4 cell counts of 200 per
cubic millimeter or less,” New England Journal of Medicine, 337, 725–733. 1
He, X. and Q.-M. Shao (2000): “On parameters of increasing dimensions,” Journal of
multivariate analysis, 73, 120–135. A
Hinz, O., B. Skiera, C. Barrot, and J. U. Becker (2011): “Seeding Strategies for
Viral Marketing: An Empirical Comparison,” Journal of Marketing, 75:6, 55–71. 32
Hirano, K. and J. R. Porter (2012): “Impossibility results for nondifferentiable func-
tionals,” Econometrica, 80, 1769–1790. 2.1.2
Iyengar, R., C. V. den Bulte, and T. W. Valente (2010): “Opinion Leadership and
Social Contagion in New Product Diffusion,” Marketing Science, 30:2, 195–212. 32

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 40
Jackson, M. O. (2008): “Average Distance, Diameter, and Clustering in Social Networks
with Homophily,” in the Proceedings of the Workshop in Internet and Network Econom-
ics (WINE 2008), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, also: arXiv:0810.2603v1, ed. by
C. Papadimitriou and S. Zhang, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg. 32
——— (2017): “A Typology of Social Capital and Associated Network Measures,” SSRN
http://ssrn.com/abstract=3073496. 32
Jackson, M. O. and L. Yariv (2011): “Diffusion, strategic interaction, and social struc-
ture,” Handbook of Social Economics, San Diego: North Holland, edited by Benhabib, J.
and Bisin, A. and Jackson, M.O. 32
Javanmard, A. and A. Montanari(2013): “Modelselectionforhigh-dimensionalregres-
sion under the generalized irrepresentability condition,” in Advances in neural information
processing systems, 3012–3020. 1, A
———(2014): “Confidenceintervalsandhypothesistestingforhigh-dimensionalregression,”
The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15, 2869–2909. 3.2.3, E.1.2, E.3
——— (2018): “Debiasing the lasso: Optimal sample size for gaussian designs,” The Annals
of Statistics, 46, 2593–2622. 3.2.3, E.1.2
Jia, J. and K. Rohe (2015): “Preconditioning the Lasso for sign consistency,” Electronic
Journal of Statistics, 9, 1150–1172. 1, 2.2, 2.2, 17, A
Johri, M., M. C. Pe´rez, C. Arsenault, J. K. Sharma, N. P. Pai, S. Pahwa, and
M.-P. Sylvestre (2015): “Strategies to increase the demand for childhood vaccination
in low-and middle-income countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis,” Bulletin of
the World Health Organization, 93, 339–346. 5
Karing, A. (2018): “Social Signaling and Childhood Immunization: A Field Experiment
in Sierra Leone,” University of California, Berkeley. 7
Kasy, M. and A. Sautmann (2021): “Adaptive treatment assignment in experiments for
policy choice,” Econometrica, 89, 113–132. 1
Katona, Z., P. P. Zubcsek, and M. Sarvary (2011): “Network Effects and Personal
Influences: The Diffusion of an Online Social Network,” Journal of Marketing Research,
48:3, 425–443. 32
Katz, E. and P. Lazarsfeld (1955): Personal influence: The part played by people in
the flow of mass communication, Free Press, Glencoe, IL. 4.2.3
Kempe, D., J. Kleinberg, and E. Tardos (2003): “Maximizing the Spread of Influence
throughaSocialNetwork,”Proc. 9th Intl. Conf. on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
137–146. 32
Krackhardt, D. (1996): “Strucutral Leverage in Marketing,” in Networks in Marketing,
ed. by D. Iacobucci, Sage, Thousand Oaks, 50–59. 32

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 41
Lee, J. D., D. L. Sun, Y. Sun, and J. E. Taylor (2016): “Exact post-selection
inference, with application to the lasso,” The Annals of Statistics, 44, 907–927. 2.4.1, 20
Leeb, H. and B. M. Po¨tscher (2005): “Modelselectionandinference: Factsandfiction,”
Econometric Theory, 21, 21–59. 4, 2.4.1
——— (2008): “Sparse estimators and the oracle property, or the return of Hodges’ estima-
tor,” Journal of Econometrics, 142, 201–211. 2.4.1
McCloskey, A. (2020): “Asymptotically uniform tests after consistent model selection
in the linear regression model,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 38, 810–825.
2.4.1
McKenzie, D. (2019): “Be careful with inference from 2-by-2 experiments and ther cross-
cutting designs,” [Online; accessed Octobrer 19, 2019]. 1
Meinshausen, N. and B. Yu (2009): “Lasso-type recovery of sparse representations for
high-dimensional data,” The annals of statistics, 37, 246–270. 46
Mekonnen, Z. A., K. A. Gelaye, M. C. Were, K. D. Gashu, and B. C. Tilahun
(2019): “Effect of mobile text message reminders on routine childhood vaccination: a
systematic review and meta-analysis,” Systematic reviews, 8, 1–14. 4.2.2
Muralidharan, K., M. Romero, and K. Wuthrich (2019): “Factorial designs, model
selection, and (incorrect) inference in randomized experiments,” . 1, 1, 1, 2.1.2, 6
NFHS (2016): “National Family Health Survey-4 State Fact Sheet for Haryana,” . 4.1
Nie, L. and V. Rocˇkova´ (2022): “Bayesian bootstrap spike-and-slab lasso,” Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 1–35. 3.2.4, E.1.3, E.4
Oyo-Ita, A., C. S. Wiysonge, C. Oringanje, C. E. Nwachukwu, O. Oduwole,
and M. M. Meremikwu (2016): “Interventions for improving coverage of childhood
immunisation in low-and middle-income countries,” Cochrane Database of Systematic Re-
views. 5
Ozawa, S., A. Mirelman, M. L. Stack, D. G. Walker, and O. S. Levine (2012):
“Cost-effectiveness and economic benefits of vaccines in low-and middle-income countries:
a systematic review,” Vaccine, 31, 96–108. 5.1.2
Ravallion, M. (2009): “Should the Randomistas Rule?” The Economists’ Voice, 6, 1–5. 1
Regan, A. K., L. Bloomfield, I. Peters, and P. V. Effler (2017): “Randomized
controlledtrialoftextmessageremindersforincreasinginfluenzavaccination,” The Annals
of Family Medicine, 15, 507–514. 6
Rocˇkova´, V. and E. I. George (2018): “The spike-and-slab lasso,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 113, 431–444. E.1.3
Rogers, E. (1995): Diffusion of Innovations, Free Press. 32
Rohe, K. (2014): “A note relating ridge regression and ols p-values to preconditioned sparse
penalized regression,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.7405. 1, 5.1.1, 36, D

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 42
Taylor, J. and R. J. Tibshirani (2015): “Statistical learning and selective inference,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112, 7629–7634. D
Tibshirani, R. J., J. Taylor, R. Lockhart, and R. Tibshirani (2016): “Exact
post-selection inference for sequential regression procedures,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 111, 600–620. 2.4.1
Uddin, M. J., M. Shamsuzzaman, L. Horng, A. Labrique, L. Vasudevan,
K. Zeller, M. Chowdhury, C. P. Larson, D. Bishai, and N. Alam (2016):
“Use of mobile phones for improving vaccination coverage among children living in rural
hard-to-reach areas and urban streets of Bangladesh,” Vaccine, 34, 276–283. 6
UNICEF and WHO (2019): “Progress and challenges with achieving universal immuniza-
tion coverage: 2018 estimates of immunization coverage WHO,” . 1
user1551 (https://math.stackexchange.com/users/1551/user1551) (2017): “Find
the uniform lower bound of the smallest eigenvalue of a certain matrix,” Mathematics
Stack Exchange, https://math.stackexchange.com/q/2438656 (version: 2017-09-21).
41
Van De Geer, S. (2019): “On the asymptotic variance of the debiased Lasso,” Electronic
Journal of Statistics, 13, 2970–3008. 3.2.3, E.1.2
Wakadha, H., S. Chandir, E. V. Were, A. Rubin, D. Obor, O. S. Levine, D. G.
Gibson, F. Odhiambo, K. F. Laserson, and D. R. Feikin (2013): “The feasibility
of using mobile-phone based SMS reminders and conditional cash transfers to improve
timely immunization in rural Kenya,” Vaccine, 31, 987–993. 5, 6
WHO (2019): “Situation Analysis of Immunization Expenditure,” . 1
Zhan, R., Z. Ren, S. Athey, and Z. Zhou (2021): “Policy learning with adaptively
collected data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.02344. 1
Zhang, C.-H. and S. S. Zhang (2014): “Confidence intervals for low dimensional param-
eters in high dimensional linear models,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series
B (Statistical Methodology), 76, 217–242. 3.2.3
Zhao, P. and B. Yu(2006): “OnmodelselectionconsistencyofLasso,”Journal of Machine
learning research, 7, 2541–2563. 1, 2.2

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 43
Figures
[3,3]
[2,3] [3,2]
[1,3] [2,2] [3,1]
[1,2] [2,1]
[1,1]
Figure 1. Hasse diagram for M = 2,R = 4 for the treatment profile where
both arms are active. A line upwards from treatment combinations [r ,r ]
1 2
to [r0,r0] means that [r ,r ] ≤ [r0,r0] and [r ,r ] 6= [r0,r0] in the intensity
1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2
ordering.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 44
Figure 2. Panels A, B, C show examples of policy-concatenations in the
η-space while panels D, E, F show the zeros in the marginal effects space,
corresponding to these concatenations. On panel A, policies [1,1],[2,1],[3,1]
are concatenated since β = β = β . Correspondingly, panel D shows
[1,1] [2,1] [3,1]
α = β −β and α = β −β . On panel B, policies {[1,1],[1,2]}
[2,1] [2,1] [1,1] [3,1] [3,1] [2,1]
and {[2,1],[2,2]} are concatenated since β = β and β = β . The
[1,1] [1,2] [2,1] [2,2]
equivalent marginal space (panel E) shows, α = β −β , α = β −
[2,1] [2,1] [1,1] [1,2] [1,2]
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
β , and α = β −β − β −β . On panel C, β = β =
[1,1] [2,2] [2,2] [2,1] [1,2] [1,1] [1,1] [1,2]
β = β . In panel F note that the only change relative to panel B is that
[2,1] [2,2]
here α = 0.
[2,1]

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 45
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
−5.0 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0
Normalized Discrepancy
FDC
laciripmE
TVA Normality (mixture distribution)
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
Legend
0.6
n = 1000 ; r = 0.245
n = 1500 ; r = 0.515
0.5
n = 3000 ; r = 0.825
n = 10000 ; r = 1
0.4 Theoretical CDF
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0 10002000300040005000600070008000900010000
Sample size n
(a) TVA: Normality
ycaruccA
Best policy inclusion
Performance Metric
Some best (OLS)
Minimum best (OLS)
Some best (TVA)
Minimum best (TVA)
Legend
Theoretical random
selection rate
(b) TVA vs OLS: Best Policy Inclusion
75
50
25
0
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000
Sample size n
)%(
egaknirhS
Shrinkage
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
Estimation type Hybrid OLS 3.0
Hybrid TVA 2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0 10002000300040005000600070008000900010000
Sample size n
(c) TVA vs OLS: Shrinkage
ESM
MSE
Legend
Best policy (OLS) Hybrid best
policy (OLS) Hybrid best
policy (TVA)
(d) TVA vs OLS: MSE
Figure 3. A plot comparing the performance of the TVA estimator to apply-
ing OLS on the unique policy specification (2.1) for a range of measures. On
panel A, we first expose the normality of TVA estimates (r is correct support
selection rate). Panel B then uses the best policy inclusion measures defined
in subsection 3.1.2 and points are slightly jittered for better readability. For
OLS, this measure is set to 1 whenever the highest treatment effect policy is
part of the true best pool (some best) or equal to the minimum dosage best
policy (min best). Panel C compares the amount of shrinkage imposed by
the winner’s curse adjustment as percentage of the initial coefficient. Panel
D compares the MSE of the best policy estimation, between the TVA and
the OLS estimator of the unique policy specification (2.1) before and after
adjusting for the winner’s curse. In all panels, there are 20 simulations per
configuration and 5 configurations per n.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 46
2
1
0
−1.0 0.0 0.3 0.8 1.2 1.5
OLS estimates
ytisneD
Distribution of OLS estimates by policy for 300 simulations
8
6
4
2
0
−1.0 0.0 0.3 0.8 1.2 1.5
TVA estimates
ytisneD
Distribution of TVA estimates by policy for 300 simulations
Legend
Pruned
Pool 1
Pool 2
Pool 3
Pool 4
(a) Densities (300 simulations)
2
1
0
c(1,
1,
c
2
(1
)
,
1,
c
3
(1
)
,
2,
c
1
(1
)
,
2,
c
2
(1
)
,
2,
c
3
(1
)
,
3,
c
1
(1
)
,
3,
c
2
(1
)
,
3,
c
3
(1
)
,
4,
c
1
(1
)
,
4,
c
2
(1
)
,
4,
c
3
(1
)
,
5,
c
1
(1
)
,
5,
c
2
(1
)
,
5,
c
3
(2
)
,
1,
c
1
(2
)
,
1,
c
2
(2
)
,
1,
c
3
(2
)
,
2,
c
1
(2
)
,
2,
c
2
(2
)
,
2,
c
3
(2
)
,
3,
c
1
(2
)
,
3,
c
2
(2
)
,
3,
c
3
(2
)
,
4,
c
1
(2
)
,
4,
c
2
(2
)
,
4,
c
3
(2
)
,
5,
c
1
(2
)
,
5,
c
2
(2
)
,
5,
c
3
(3
)
,
1,
c
1
(3
)
,
1,
c
2
(3
)
,
1,
c
3
(3
)
,
2,
c
1
(3
)
,
2,
c
2
(3
)
,
2,
c
3
(3
)
,
3,
c
1
(3
)
,
3,
c
2
(3
)
,
3,
c
3
(3
)
,
4,
c
1
(3
)
,
4,
c
2
(3
)
,
4,
c
3
(3
)
,
5,
c
1
(3
)
,
5,
c
2
(3
)
,
5,
c
3
(4
)
,
1,
c
1
(4
)
,
1,
c
2
(4
)
,
1,
c
3
(4
)
,
2,
c
1
(4
)
,
2,
c
2
(4
)
,
2,
c
3
(4
)
,
3,
c
1
(4
)
,
3,
c
2
(4
)
,
3,
c
3
(4
)
,
4,
c
1
(4
)
,
4,
c
2
(4
)
,
4,
c
3
(4
)
,
5,
c
1
(4
)
,
5,
c
2
(4
)
,
5,
c
3
(5
)
,
1,
c
1
(5
)
,
1,
c
2
(5
)
,
1,
c
3
(5
)
,
2,
c
1
(5
)
,
2,
c
2
(5
)
,
2,
c
3
(5
)
,
3,
c
1
(5
)
,
3,
c
2
(5
)
,
3,
c
3
(5
)
,
4,
c
1
(5
)
,
4,
c
2
(5
)
,
4,
c
3
(5
)
,
5,
c
1
(5
)
,
5,
c
2
(5
)
,
5,
3)
Policy combinations
tceffe
detamitsE
OLS estimates on unique policy regression
Legend
Pruned
Pool 1
Pool 2
Pool 3
Pool 4
2.0
pppp ==== 0000....00000000888877776666
1.5 pppp ==== 0000....00000000000000000000
pppp ==== 1111eeee−−−−00005555 1.0
0.5
0.0
Pool
3
Pool
1
Pool
2
Pool
4
Policy combinations
tceffe
detamitsE
TVA estimates on unique policy regression
Legend
Pool 1 Pool 2
Pool 3
Pool 4
(b) Estimated Coefficients
Figure 4. This figure presents results from a simulation setting with n = 4000 and where
4 pooled policies (each composed of 3-8 unique policies) are non-zero with effects 0.3, 0.8,
1.2 and 1.5 respectively. For OLS applied to (2.1) and TVA, we show both the distribution
of policy estimates across 300 simulations (panel A) and the estimated policy coefficients
for one representative simulated draw (panel B). Note that the color labeling for OLS plots
corresponds to the true underlying pooled and pruned policies. For the TVA density plots,
we condition on the event that the TVA estimator has selected the correct support (mean
support accuracy is 92.2% across simulations).

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 47
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000
Sample size n
ycaruccA
troppuS
gvA
TVA Support Accuracies
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
Regime
R1 0.6
R2 0.5
R3
R4 0.4
R5
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000
Sample size n
(a) Support Accuracy
etamitse
detsujda−CW
fo
ESM
TVA MSE
Regime
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5
(b) MSE of Best Policy
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6 0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000
Sample size n
noisulcnI
yciloP
tseB
emoS
TVA Some Best
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
Regime
R1 0.6 R2 0.5
R3
R4 0.4
R5
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000
Sample size n
(c) Some Best Policy Inclusion
noisulcnI
yciloP
tseB
niM
TVA Min Best
Regime
R1 R2
R3
R4
R5
(d) Min Best Policy Inclusion
Figure 5. This figure shows the performance of the TVA estimator under
relaxations of the sparsity assumptions. We show support accuracy (panel
A), MSE of the best policy (panel B), Some Best policy inclusion rate (panel
C) and Minimum Best policy inclusion rate (panel D) as a function of n for
five different levels of violating sparsity requirements (R1-R5). Per regime,
there are 20 simulations per support configuration per n, for five support
configurations.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 48
2 p = 0.013 p = 0.036
0
−2
SMS SMS High Low High Low Random Information Trusted Trusted
33%−level 66%−level Flat Flat Slope Slope Person Hub Person Information
Hub
Treatment arm
noitaniccaV
selsaeM
no
stceffE
Interventions Average Effects
Treatment
Incentives
Reminders
Seeds
Figure 6. Effects on the number of measles vaccinations relative to control
(7.32) by reminders, incentives, and seeding policies, restricted to the vil-
lages were the ambassador intervention was administered. The specification
is weighted by village population, controls for district-time fixed effects, and
clusters standard errors at the sub-center level.

TREATMENT VARIANT AGGREGATION TO SELECT POLICIES 49
Figure 7. TVA estimates of combinations of reminders, incentives, and seed-
ing policies on the number of measles vaccines (Panel A) and the number of
measles vaccines per $ (Panel B) relative to control (7.32 and 0.0436 respec-
tively). The specifications are weighted by village population and include
controls for district-time fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
sub-center level. 95% confidence intervals displayed.