∗
Does Conservation Work in General Equilibrium?
† ‡
Ver´onica Salazar Restrepo and Gabriel Leite Mariante
January 11, 2024
PRELIMINARY VERSION: This draft is edited frequently. See latest version HERE.
Abstract
Deforestation and the subsequent use of deforested land for agricultural activi-
ties account for roughly 20% of the global CO2-equivalent emissions in the past two
decades. Despite the global scope of the consequences of deforestation, public policies
and private initiatives to reduce deforestation are often spatially targeted: they inten-
sify environmental protection in specific ecosystems, making agricultural land scarcer.
While potentially effective at a local level, their global effectiveness may be attenuated
in general equilibrium, due to resulting increases in the demand for agricultural land
in non-targeted areas, i.e. deforestation leakage. To quantify leakage, we build a quan-
titative spatial equilibrium model of the Brazilian economy where agricultural land is
the output of a costly process of deforestation, firms produce goods that are differen-
tially land-demanding, and there is costly trade and migration. Our main findings are
that (i) targeting the regions with highest deforestation levels can be an effective tool
to curb aggregate deforestation in Brazil, and (ii) leakage increases significantly when
considering a longer time-horizon. After one year, 2-3% of the deforestation reductions
are outdone by leakage. Simulating the model forward for 10 years, this number goes
up to 10%. The relatively small leakage is driven by agricultural intensification, in-
cluding more crop farming, increased worker and cattle density per pasture, and shifts
of production towards more productive regions.
∗
For their generous mentorship, we thank Oriana Bandiera, Gharad Bryan, Robin Burgess, and Daniel Sturm. For all
theircommentsandquestions,wethankseminaraudiencesatLSE’sDevelopmentEconomicsWorkinProgress,LSE’sEnergy
& Environmental Economics seminar, LSE’s International Trade Workshop, and conference audiences at STEG-CEPR 2023,
LSE’sEnvironmentWeek2023,Bocconi(EMUEA2023),Cyprus(EAERE2023),andOxford(OxDev2023). Fortheirtimeand
insightfuldiscussions,wethankClareBalboni,TimDoberman,MatthiasDoepke,JamesFenske,DouglasGollin,AllanHsiao,
JulianaJaramilloEcheverri,XavierJaravel,PerKrusell,IsabellaManelici,PolSimpson,XavierTierney,JulienWolfersberger.
†
DepartmentofEconomics,LondonSchoolofEconomics. E-mail: v.salazar-restrepo@lse.ac.uk.
‡
DepartmentofEconomics,LondonSchoolofEconomics. E-mail: g.leite-mariante@lse.ac.uk.
1

1 Introduction
Tropical deforestation is among the human activities with the highest environmental impact.
Forest clearing and the subsequent land use for agricultural activity is responsible for about
one-fifth of global CO2-equivalent emissions of the past two decades. In addition to direct in-
stantaneous carbon emissions, deforestation permanently destroys carbon sinks, extinguishes
wildlife, degrades native soil, alters weather patterns, and negatively impacts the livelihoods
of millions of humans who live in communities that depend on forest dwelling.
Given its enormous environmental damage, combating deforestation is a key component
of emission reduction pathways in the global fight to mitigate the effects of climate change,
as established by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (IPCC, 2019)1.
Nevertheless, strategies to mitigate deforestation are excluded from major green finance
mechanisms, such as the United Nations Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), due to
concerns about leakage of locally targeted policies into untargeted areas - i.e. the reduction
of deforestation in a specific area might be outdone by increases in deforestation elsewhere,
undermining the global effects of local policies2.
Since approximately three-quarters of global deforestation is driven by agriculture, quan-
tifying general equilibrium effects of anti-deforestation policies requires a model of how agri-
culture is redistributed across space in response to local policies. To that end, we build a
quantitative model that explicitly embeds deforestation as an economic sector that supplies
land as a factor of production for agriculture. Beyond the direct policy relevance of assess-
ing the global efficiency of localised policies, our framework can guide the understanding
of broader trade-offs in environmental policy (promoting conservation vs curtailing agricul-
tural production), and the value of mitigating global externalities of localised forest-cutting
actions3.
Deforestation in Brazil
With over 5 million km2 of rainforest area (MapBiomas Collection 6.0), Brazil accounts for
about one third of all remaining rainforests and 13% of all forests in the planet, far more
1In its 2019 Special Report on Climate Change and Land, the IPCC mentions the word “deforestation”
a total of 493 times, and states that “Reducing deforestation and forest degradation lowers GHG emissions,
with an estimated technical mitigation potential of 0.4–5.8 GtCO2/yr”
2The UN defines deforestation leakage as “The unexpected loss of anticipated carbon benefits due to the
displacement of activities in the project area to areas outside the project, resulting in carbon emissions.”.
In other words, locally targeted policies might not decrease overall deforestation, but rather displace it to
untargeted areas.
3This framework could be used, for example, to implement a compensation policy for specific regions or
for the country as a whole, a policy that has been suggested by a number of researchers and politicians as
the only viable way to sustainably avoid deforestation (Brner and Wunder, 2008).
2

Figure 1: Average yearly forest loss by municipality
Note: This figure shows average forest loss in square kilometers across all 5,568 Brazilian municipalities
over three 10-year periods: 1990-2000, 2000-2010, 2010-2020. Municipalities are coloured according to total
forest loss over each time period, with darker colours indicating higher forest loss.
than any other country. It also accounts for a third of yearly tropical deforestation, with
an average net yearly forest loss of about 20,000 km2 between 1985 and 20204 (roughly
equivalent to the size of Wales, or the American state of Connecticut). As such, outcomes of
policies aiming at reducing deforestation in Brazil will have significant impact in the global
forest coverage and, consequently, carbon emissions.
Deforestation has played a central role in the Brazilian economy over the past 35 years
as an input for the country’s agricultural sector, currently responsible for approximately
one-quarter of the Brazilian GDP (CNA and CEPEA, 2023). Since 1985, the first year for
which reliable high resolution satellite data on land use is available, total agricultural area
has increased by more than 45%, or 840,000 km2 (MapBiomas Collection 6.0), of which 92%
were previously forests and 8% were previously tropical savannas. As illustrated in Figure 1,
this activity is highly spatially concentrated along the so-called “arc of deforestation”, in the
fringe the Amazonian region, especially in the states of Par´a, Mato Grosso and Rondoˆnia.
The large municipality of S˜ao F´elix do Xingu, in the state of Par´a, with a total area of
around 84,000 km2 (roughly the size of Austria), is an excellent illustrative example. In
1985, it had a forest cover of over 80,000 km2, equivalent to more than 95% of its total
area, and agricultural activity occupied only 410 km2 (0.5%). In 2021, it had just under
63,000 km2 (under 75% of its area) of forest cover, and over 19,000 km2 (well over 20%) of
agricultural land, most of which pastures.
Over the past three decades, the Brazilian government has enacted a wide array of poli-
cies aiming at tackling deforestation. These policies include country-level actions, such as
changes in the national legislation (e.g. Forest Code) or the use of satellite monitoring
4The gross loss of primary forest has been higher, over 25,000 km2 per year, but there is considerable
amount of forest regrowth.
3

(SIVAM - from the 90s), but also localised policies aiming at protecting specific areas of
the Brazilian territory. The latter group, which is the focus of our study, has typically been
implemented either as increased enforcement in areas with particularly high deforestation,
or as the designation of specific areas in the territory as conservation units or protected
indigenous land. Such localised policies have been the subject of past evaluation which has
generally found them to be successful in the targeted areas (Assun¸ca˜o and Rocha, 2019).
Typically, studies evaluating such policies use an event-study approach to measure their
effectiveness in the targeted regions vis-a`-vis comparable non-targeted regions (Assunc¸˜ao
and Rocha, 2019). However, this approach does not account for potential relocation of
deforestation activities into non-targeted areas, which can significantly attenuate the effect
of such policies on overall country-wide deforestation. To illustrate this idea, suppose that
regions targeted by a certain policy see a decrease of 5,000 km2 in their annual deforestation,
whereascomparablenon-targetedregionsseeanincreaseof5,000km2 inannualdeforestation
rates – i.e. there is perfect relocation. A simple difference-in-differences analysis would
suggest that the policy decreased deforestation by 10,000 km2 when in fact it only changed
where it occurred, and the global effect is zero. This issue, referred to in the climate policy
literature as leakage, is often discussed (Pfaff and Robalino, 2017) but rarely measured when
evaluating specific anti-deforestation policies5.
The Model
Our model considers a multi-region economy with two main sectors: agriculture and non-
agriculture. The agricultural sector is further split into different types of crops and pastures
that demand different amounts of land and labour as factors of production, whereas the
non-agricultural sector has only labour as input. Crucially, we model deforestation as an in-
termediate sector which endogenously supplies land as a factor of production for agriculture.
Each location differs in their sectoral productivity (agricultural, non-agricultural and defor-
estation), amenities and trade links. We allow workers to migrate between regions subject
to frictions, and goods to be traded across regions subject to iceberg costs.
In the model, a local anti-deforestation policy is modelled as an exogenous negative shock
tolandsupplyinatargetedregion. Leakagehappensduetorelocationofagriculturalactivity
via the markets for goods and labour. In the goods market, a local decrease in supply of
land will decrease the local supply of agricultural goods. Consumers then substitute these
5It has become increasingly common to measure spillovers by looking at the changes in land use in the
vicinity of protected areas, for example. While a valuable empirical exercise, it might not appropriately
account for global spillovers, as the most suitable substitute for the land being protected may be in an
entirely different part of the country - in this approach, the choice of which areas can be the subject of
spillovers needs to be made ex-ante and is arbitrary.
4

goods withnon-agricultural goods, or with agriculturalgoodsproduced elsewhere, increasing
demand for land in other regions, which creates leakage. Analogously, in the labour market,
a decrease in supply of land will decrease the local demand for agricultural labour – workers
will then partly change sectors, and partly migrate increasing the supply of agricultural
labour elsewhere, which also creates leakage. The extent to which reductions in forest loss
areoutdoneby leakageultimately dependsonthe elasticity ofdemandforagricultural goods,
and on the substitutability of agricultural land across space.
Literature
Our paper contributes to the growing literature on the evaluation of anti-deforestation poli-
cies (Burgess et al., 2012; Jayachandran et al., 2017; Szerman et al., 2022). Existing evidence
suggests that command-and-control policy instruments have played a crucial role in the slow-
down of deforestation in Brazil, lowering it by as much 56% from what if would have been in
the absence of policies that started to be implemented around 2004 (Assun¸ca˜o et al., 2015;
Burgess et al., 2019).
We contribute to this strand of the literature by: (i) disentangling the many driving
forces of deforestation (regional comparative advantage in agricultural activities, market
access, residential amenities, and deforestation productivity), and (ii) quantifying general-
equilibrium spillovers, whereby the reduction of deforestation in one area is accompanied by
its increase elsewhere. Pfaff and Robalino (2017) summarise the theory and evidence on the
spillovers of conservation programs which, at the time, lacked any structural quantitative
analysis of spillovers due to general equilibrium effects. Instead, it looked at spillovers to
neighbouring areas outside conservation zones.
A more recent strand of the trade and IO literature looks at deforestation in general
equilibrium (Souza-Rodrigues, 2018; Hsiao, 2021; Domiguez-Iino, 2021) by drawing on foun-
dational insights from theoretical models of trade and environmental conservation (Copeland
and Taylor, 2004). A related literature analyses how comparative advantage in agricultural
activities shapes the spatial distribution of different land uses, generally without considering
deforestation explicitly (Cui, 2020; Pellegrina and Sotelo, 2021).
We contribute to this literature by adding labor and migration to general equilibrium
models of land use change, and by explicitly linking land use changes with patterns of
economic growth and structural change in space (Eckert and Peters, 2022; Farrokhi and
Pellegrina, 2020; Bustos et al., 2016; Herrendorf et al., 2014; Boppart, 2014) .
Methodologically, our model expands on the spatial equilibrium model proposed by Eck-
ert and Peters (2022). We build on their framework by (i) adding a deforestation sector
that endogenously produces new agricultural land, and (ii) considering different agricultural
5

sectors that can have heterogeneous shares of land and labour.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional
context and estimates the local effects of existing targeted conservation strategies with a
reduced form approach as motivating evidence. Section 3 describes the model along with
theestimationandcalibrationofthevariousmodelparameters. Section4presentstheresults
of the counterfactual analysis. Section 5 concludes.
2 Local Effects of Targeted Conservation
Existing research suggests that Brazil’s approach to tackling deforestation over the first
two decades of the 21st century has been successful in reducing country level deforestation,
(Burgess et al., 2019; Assun¸ca˜o et al., 2015) . During this period, a vast array of policies
were implemented by the federal government. Some of these are “blanket-level” policies
affecting the entire Brazilian territory, such as changes in laws increasing legal limits for
deforestation in private land (DOU, 2012) and the adoption of a unified Action Plan for the
Prevention and Control of Deforestation in the Legal Amazon (PPCDAm). Others, however,
were locally targeted policies, which raises the concerns of possible leakage: has the forest
loss avoided in these areas simply moved somewhere else?
Among the local anti-deforestation policies enacted by the Brazilian government, two
have been especially prominent. The first is the establishment of “Priority Municipalities”
policy, enacted by the Brazilian government in 2007 (DOU, 2007). A set of municipalities
in the Amazon region where deforestation rates were among the highest in the country were
selected to be subject to extra enforcement actions. In a first round, 36 municipalities ac-
countingforaround45%ofthepreviousyear’sdeforestationwereincludedintheprioritylist,
which has been updated on a yearly basis ever since. Selected municipalities were subject
to increased law enforcement activities such as fines, embargoes on private farms, political
agreements with local leaders, and credit incentives from the federal government. After the
start of the policy, yearly deforestation in targeted areas significantly decreased (Assun¸ca˜o
and Rocha, 2019). The second prominent example of local conservation policies is the con-
tinuous establishment by the Brazilian Government of specific areas where deforestation is
completely banned. Such areas are established either for wildlife and biodiversity conserva-
tion – the so called Unidades de Conserva¸c˜ao (Conservation Units), or for preservation of
land that has been traditionally inhabited by native indigenous people – the so called Ter-
rito´rios Ind´ıgenas (Indigenous Territories). These policies began with the country’s return
to democracy in 1985 and, as of 2022, a total area of approximately 3,500 km2 has been
granted one of these two status. Due to their practical similarities, both types of policies
6

will henceforth be referred to as Protected Areas. Unlike the Priority Municipalities policy,
Protected Areas typically have high forest coverage and little deforestation, and the goal is
to conserve the natural biome rather than to crack down on existing degradation.
Before turning to a quantitative analysis of leakage in place-based policies, it is important
to discuss the reasons why, given the local effectiveness of targeted policies, one does not
simply extend these policies to cover the entire country which would, by construction, end
deforestation (and, trivially, leakage) altogether. Firstly, the enforcement of conservation
policies is costly for public funds – research estimates that, in order to place 80% of the
BrazilianAmazonundersomeformofcurrentlyexistingpolicy, thefederalgovernmentwould
need to spend at least 1.7 Billion USD per year (da Silva et al., 2022). Secondly, from a social
welfare perspective, the conversion of forested land into agriculture generates private profits,
which could result in a non-zero optimal level of deforestation from the perspective of Brazil.
Thirdly, and related to the private optimal argument, there is a political cost of restricting
deforestation activities, since the proceeds of those are often captured by local political
elites. Fourthly, from a public revenues perspective, modern agriculture that results from
forest removal is more easily measured and, consequently, taxed, than alternative sustainable
economic activities
Reduced-form evidence from studies evaluating the effects of place-based conservation
policies in Brazil suggest that they have been effective in decreasing deforestation in targeted
areas. However,inordertocapturethetrueeffectofalocalpolicyrelativetoacounterfactual
in which this policy was never implemented, reduced-form methods rely heavily on the stable
unit treatment value assumption (SUTVA) - i.e. absent treatment, non-treated areas would
have behaved exactly as they did in the presence of treatment elsewhere. In the case of a
conservation policy that can be subject to leakage, this assumption might not hold, as shown
next.
2.1 Descriptives
Figures 2 and 3 illustrate the evolution of place-based anti-deforestation policies in Brazil
between 1985 and 2020. From Figure 2, we can see that both policies are largely focussed
on areas in Amazonian region. The Priority List (in green) targets exclusively municipalities
within the Brazilian Legal Amazon, most of which located in the so called “deforestation
arc” covering the south of the states of Amazonas and Para´ and the north of the state of
Mato Grosso. Although the Protected Areas are somewhat more spread across the country6,
they are still spatially concentrated in the Amazon biome, north of the municipalities in
6Mainly due to territories historically occupied by indigenous peoples in the Northeast and Southeast
regions
7

Figure 2: Spatial distribution of Priority List municipalities (green), Conservation Units
(orange), and Indigenous Territories (yellow) as of 2021.
Note: Thisfigureillustratesthespatialtargetingofthethreerelevanttypesofprotectedareasimplemented
by the Brazilian government over the past decades. The left panel shows, in green, the municipalities that
have been added to the Priority List since its start in 2008. The right panel shows the location of protected
areas (which do not necessarily coincide with municipal borders) according to its type: orange areas are
Conservation Units, yellow areas are demarcated Indigenous Territories
the Priority List, in areas with more untouched forest cover. In Figure 3, we can see the
temporal evolution of these policies. Protected areas have been gradually established since
the country’s redemocratisation in 1985, whereas the Priority List policy was created in
2007, with most municipalities being added to the list in that same year.
Figure 4 below illustrates trends in forest change in Brazil according to their status as
protected areas in 2020: indigenous territories, conservation units, and the rest of country.
It is clear that, between 1985 and 2020, the bulk of forest loss happened outside protected
areas. Throughout the period, forest cover in indigenous territories and protected areas have
remained above 90% and 80% respectively, compared to those outside of them, which have
gone from above 60% to under 50%.
However, this fact alone is not convincing evidence that they have worked as an effective
halt on deforestation. The first concern with this simple comparison is the endogeneity of
their placement - this is often referred to in policy circles as the question of “additionality”.
The second concern when evaluating the effectiveness of any local conservation policy is the
possible presence of spillover effects - in particular the question of “leakage”.
Regarding endogeneity, the bias could be positive or negative. These territories may have
been established in places without good soils for agriculture, far from roads and markets,
8

Figure 3: Evolution of spatially targeted conservation policies
)mk
qs
0001(
aerA
latoT
0051
0001
005
0
1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
year
Indigenous Territories Conservation Units
Priority List Municipalities
Note: Thisfigureillustratestheevolutionovertimeofthetotalareaunderdifferenttypesoflocallytargeted
policies by the Brazilian government. The yellow line represents the total area of demarcated Indigenous
Territories, the orange line represents the total area under Conservation Units, and the green line represents
the total area of all municipalities included in the Priority List policy.
Figure 4: Area covered in natural vegetation under different conservation policies
noitategev
larutan
yb
derevoc
egatnecreP
001
59
09
58
08
1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
year
Indigenous Territories Conservation Units
Priority List
Note: This figure illustrates the evolution over time of the territorial coverage in natural vegetation, as a
shareoftotalarea,forregionsunderthedifferenttypesoflocallytargetedpoliciesimplementedtheBrazilian
government. TheyellowlinerepresentstheevolutionofnaturalvegetationcoverageinIndigenousTerritories,
theorangelinerepresentsrepresentstheevolutionofnaturalvegetationcoverageinConservationUnits,and
the green line represents the eevolution of natural vegetation cover in municipalities from the Priority List.
or with geographic conditions that make them harder to deforest. But it could also go the
opposite way, if environmental agencies respond to environmental threats by establishing
protected areas and indigenous peoples decide to formalise protection as a reaction to set-
tlers arriving and cutting down the forests in their land. It could go one way in places where
9

the local politicians and bureaucrats are more aligned with the interests of agricultural busi-
nesses, and the other way where they are operating with the goal of stopping deforestation.
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of the establishment of protected areas and indige-
nous territories in halting deforestation, we exploit their staggered establishment and look
at places near their borders with a regression discontinuity design.
Most of the area under indigenous territories and protected areas has been assigned after
1985, which is when our land use data, taken begins. The graph below shows how the area
under each of those property right regimes has changed over time.
The blacklist started in 2008. It is a subset of municipalities in the Legal Amazon that
were chosen for their strategic importance in halting deforestation. The total deforestation
levels the five years before are good predictors of blacklist status, although they do not seem
to exactly determine blacklisting. Figure 3 illustrates how the blacklist has changed over
time. In2008, 36municipalitieswereaddedtothelist, coveringatotalareaofapproximately
800,000 square kilometers. Since then, the total number of blacklisted municipalities has not
changed vary much, remaining around 40. The total area has increased to around 1,000,000
square kilometers. Some municipalities have entered and some have exited the blacklist.
Upon exit, previously blacklisted municipalities acquire the status of “monitored”. Since
2008, 20 municipalities have exited the blacklist and 3 of those have returned. There have
been 2 periods of significant change in the blacklist. First, the period 2008-2012, with most
of the action concentrated in 2008. Second, the period 2017-2020, with most of the action
concentrated in 2017, when 9 municipalities covering over 200,000 square kilometers were
added. The second period reflects a shift of deforestation further north, towards the Amazon
river.
2.2 Econometric specification
2.2.1 Priority List
To evaluate the effectiveness of placing municipalities in a Priority List, we follow (Assun¸ca˜o
and Rocha, 2019) and conduct a standard two-way fixed effects event study around the
year in which municipalities were added to the priority list. Our baseline specification is as
follows:
(cid:88)
NF
Defor = δ +γ + β Priority +(cid:15) (1)
rt t r τ r,t−τ rt
τ=−NL
Where Defor is log-deforestation observed in municipality r at year t, δ are year
rt t
10

fixed-effects, γ are municipality fixed effects, Priority is a dummy variable equal to
r r,t−τ
one if municipality r has been added to the priority list exactly τ years ago, and β are
τ
our coefficients of interest. We consider event-times between 7 years before (N ) and 10
L
years after (N ) policy implementation. In order to address potential issues caused by
F
staggered treatment adoption in two-way fixed effects event studies, we keep in our sample
only municipalities that have either been added to the Priority List in 2008 or have never
been added to the list, excluding municipalities added to the priority list after 2008.
Validity – The validity of our event-study approach relies on the assumption of parallel
trends, i.e., treated and untreated municipalities followed parallel trends in deforestation
rates in the years leading up to 2008, which implies β = 0 ∀ τ ∈ [−N ,0). Given that
τ L
the Priority List policy was explicitly targeted at municipalities considered “deforestation
hotspots”, it is plausible that treated municipalities followed different trends by design. In
this case, the estimates resulting from a standard event-study approach may be downwards
biased. To deal with this issue, we complement our analysis by estimating a difference-in-
differences equation with synthetic controls, where each treated municipality is matched to
a linear combination of untreated municipalities that results in equal pre-treatment trends,
as per the equation below:
Defor = δ +γ +β Priority +(cid:15) (2)
rt t r τ rt rt
2.2.2 Protected Areas
UnlikethePriorityListpolicy, theestablishmentofprotectedareas(bothConservationUnits
and Indigenous Territories) does not necessarily coincide with municipal borders. Hence, we
split the Brazilian territory in 100, hexagons with 10km width, and classify each of them as
being or not part of a protected area if at least 50% of it’s surface falls within the demarcated
boundaries.
We use the hexagon-level data to estimate a Regression Discontinuity Design around the
border of the conservation unit. Our baseline specification is:
ForestArea = δ +γ +f(Dist )+βD +(cid:15) (3)
rt t m rt rt rt
Where ForestArea is total forest area in logs observed in hexagon r at year t, δ are
rt t
year fixed-effects, γ are municipality fixed effects, f() is a continuous function, Dist t is the
m r
11

running variable measuring the distance in km to the border of the nearest conservation unit
where negative (positive) values mean that the hexagon falls inside (outside) the protected
area, and D t is a dummy variable indicating whether hexagon r falls within a protected area
r
attimet. Thecoefficientofinterestinβ,identifyingtheeffectondeforestationofbeinginside
the conservation area. We use forest area instead of deforestation as an outcome because
protected areas are typically established in regions with very low levels of deforestation, so
the numeric interpretation of the effect on forested area is clearer. We follow Calonico et al.
(2014) and implement optimal bandwidth selection to choose the maximum distance to the
demarcated conservation border to be considered.
Validity – The validity of our RD design relies on the assumption of continuity of the
outcome variable with respect to the running variable in the absence of treatment. In other
words,intheabsenceoftheprotectedareas,deforestationdoesnotseeadiscontinuousspatial
jump at D = 0. To test this assumption, we estimate the same Regression Discontinuity
rt
design considering only hexagons located in future protected areas, but before they were
established.
SUTVA violation
As previously discussed, an assumption required for the validity of both reduced-form meth-
ods discussed above is SUTVA. Consider the treatment D a binary variable equal to 1 if a
i
place is subject to a conservation policy, 0 otherwise. Assume that the potential outcome of
i depends on two factors, its own conservation status, and the price of land, which depends
(cid:126)
on the conservation statuses in all regions Y (D ,P(D)). Even if treatment was as good as
i i
randomly assigned, but SUTVA did not hold, we would be estimating a combination of the
desired treatment effect and leakage as show below
β(cid:98)→E(cid:2)
Y (1,P(D
(cid:126)
)−Y (0,P(D
(cid:126)
)
(cid:3)
i policy i policy
=
E(cid:2)
Y (1,P(D
(cid:126)
)−Y (0,P(D
(cid:126)
)
(cid:3)
i nopolicy i nopolicy
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
Pureeffectofpolicyontreated
+E(cid:2)
Y (1,P(D
(cid:126)
)−Y (1,P(D
(cid:126)
)
(cid:3)
i policy i nopolicy
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
Leakageontreated
−E(cid:2)
Y (0,P(D
(cid:126)
)−Y (0,P(D
(cid:126)
)
(cid:3)
.
i policy i nopolicy
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
Leakageonuntreated
A reduced-form estimate, therefore, would include both the desired ATE on the Treated
and potential leakage onto untreated areas. Therefore, it requires an assumption about
12

the nature of the second right-hand side term in the equation above. Typically, the im-
plicit assumption is that there is no leakage, i.e. Y (d,P ) = Y (d,P ), which results in an
i 1 i 2
overestimation of the true treatment effect.
Even if leakage is explicitly considered, a reduced-form estimate requires assuming some
arbitraryex-ante structuredeterminingwhichregionsarepronetoleakage,andwhichregions
can be considered a “pure control”. One common approach is to assume that neighbouring
areas are prone to leakage, whereas places further away from treatment are not affected in
any way. Whereas this might be plausible from a purely spatial perspective, it has two
problems: (i) it still requires some arbitrary distance cut-off that separates areas that are
susceptible to leakage from areas that are not, and (ii) it ignores other spillover mechanism,
such as price changes, transportation connections and local amenities that might also be
important determinants of the location of spillovers.
2.3 Results
2.3.1 Priority List
Figure 5 below shows a visual representation of the event study estimates. Panels (a) and
(b) show the effect on deforestation, panels (c) and (d) show the effect on decrease in total
net forest area decrease (including naturally regrown forest), and panels (e) and (f) show
the effect on total agricultural area. The left panels (a), (c) and (e) consider the entirety of
Brazil, whereas the right panels (b), (d) and (f) consider only the Brazilian Legal Amazon.
A few clear patterns emerge: firstly, the β coefficients for τ > 0 are negative and
τ
generally significant for deforestation and net forest area decrease, suggesting that the policy
had an effect in reducing deforestation locally, in line with the findings from Assun¸ca˜o and
Rocha (2019). Secondly, the β coefficients for τ < 0 are positive and generally significant
τ
for deforestation for deforestation and net forest area decrease, suggesting the existence of
pre-trends: before being added to the priority list, targeted municipalities had a stronger
evolution in deforestation than non-targeted. Thirdly, there is a very clear upwards trend
in agricultural area before the implementation of the policy, suggesting that targeted areas
are those which were increasingly converting forest area into agricultural land prior to being
included in the priority list.
The existence of pre-trends violates the validity assumption of the event-study design,
which means that our estimates for the policy effect are likely biased. To deal with that,
we conduct a synthetic differences-in-differences estimation. The results are qualitatively in
line with a visual inspection of the event studies: the point estimates (standard errors) are
1.09% (0.11) for the policy impact on annual deforestation and -0.11% (0.03) on agricultural
13

Figure 5: Event-study estimate of the impact of the Priority List policy on various outcomes
.5
0
-.5
-1
noitatserofeD
)goL(
(Log) Deforestation
.5
0
-.5
-1
-7 Year relativ0e to Blacklist entry year 10
(<0 Leads, >0 Lags)
noitatserofeD
)goL(
(Log) Deforestation
-7 Year relativ0e to Blacklist entry year 10
(<0 Leads, >0 Lags)
1
0
-1
-2
-3
esaerceD
aerA
tseroF
)goL(
(Log) Forest Area Decrease
1
0
-1
-2
-7 Year relati0ve to Blacklist entry year 10
(<0 Leads, >0 Lags)
esaerceD
aerA
tseroF
)goL(
(Log) Forest Area Decrease
-7 Year relati0ve to Blacklist entry year 10
(<0 Leads, >0 Lags)
.2
0
-.2
-.4
-.6
aerA
larutlucirgA
)goL(
(Log) Agricultural Area
.1
0
-.1
-.2
-.3
-7 Year relativ0e to Blacklist entry year 10
(<0 Leads, >0 Lags)
aerA
larutlucirgA
)goL(
(Log) Agricultural Area
-7 Year relativ0e to Blacklist entry year 10
(<0 Leads, >0 Lags)
Note: This figure shows the β estimates from the event-study specified in Equation 1 on three outcomes
τ
of interest: deforestation (top row), forest area decrease (middle row - defined as the difference between
deforestation and forest regrowth), and total area in agriculture (bottom row). The three panels on the left
considerall5,568munipalitiesinBrazil,whereasthethreepanelsontherightconsideronlythemunicipalities
fromtheBrazilianLegalAmazon,definedbythegovernmentascomprisingallsevenstatesfromtheNorthern
region of Brazil, plus the states of Maranhao and Mato Grosso.
area in the ten years following the policy implementation.
14

Figure 6: Discontinuity in forested area around borders of protected areas.
slaudiser
tseroF
ni aerA
)gol(
fo
naeM
3.4
1.4
9.3
7.3
5.3
-50 0 50
Distance to border of PA or IT (km) (<0, inside)
(a) No controls
slaudiser
tseroF
ni aerA
)gol(
fo
naeM
01.0
60.0
10.0
40.0-
80.0-
-50 0 50
Distance to border of PA or IT (km) (<0, inside)
(b) Municipality and Year FE’s
Note: This figure illustrates the discontinuity in forested area around the borders of protected areas. Each
dotrepresentsthemeantotallog-forestedareawithinbinsof10kmaroundtheborderofallprotectedareas,
from 50km inside of 50km outside. The x-axis shows distance to the border, with negative (positive) values
indicating the area inside (outside) the protected area. The left-hand side panel illustrates the simple raw
averages. The right-hand panel illustrates averages of the residuals of a regression of log-forested area on
municipality and year fixed effects.
2.3.2 Protected Areas
Figure 6 illustrates our regression discontinuity approach by showing average forest area in
bins of 10km around the border of a protected area. Panel (a) on the left shows the simple
RD specification with a quadratic fit and no fixed-effects, whereas panel (b) on the right
shows the residualised means on municipality and year fixed-effects. Both specification show
a clear jump in forested area of around 0.2 log-points at the demarcated border, suggesting
that the establishment of protected areas does succeed in locally protecting forest cover.
Table 1 show the estimated β from Equation 3 when adding different sets of fixed-effects.
The resulting estimates show an increase of between 0.14 and 0.24 log-points in the forest
coverage at the border of a protected area, in line with Figure 6.
In order to test the validity of our regression discontinuity design, we investigate the
plausibility of the smoothness assumption by comparing what happens at the border a
future protected area before it is established. Figure 7 illustrates this comparison. Panels
(a) and (b) show, respectively, average forest cover around the border of a protected area
before and after its implementation. Panels (c) and (d) show the exact same comparison, but
now including year and municipality fixed-effects. Table 2 below shows the corresponding
estimates for the RD parameter β.
The raw comparison from Figure 7 panel (a), as well as estimates from Table 2 columns
(1) and (2) shows that, before the implementation of a protected area, the area with for-
est coverage evolved smoothly around the border of the future conservation area. When
15

(Outcome: log-forested area)
(1) (2) (3)
Estimated Gap (PA or IT) 0.1430∗∗∗ 0.2396∗∗∗ 0.2378∗∗∗
[0.0425] [0.0343] [0.0356]
Quad spline Yes Yes Yes
Year FE Yes No Yes
Mun FE No Yes Yes
Year X mun. FE No No Yes
R2 0.0691 0.6081 0.6259
Observations 2.16e+06 2.16e+06 2.16e+06
Note: *p<0.1, **p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
Table 1: Regression discontinuity estimates for the effect of Protected Areas on forested area
5+ years before 10+ years before
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Estimated Placebo Gap 0.0387 0.0678 0.2509∗∗∗ 0.0777∗∗
[0.0620] [0.0450] [0.0583] [0.0336]
Quad. spline Quad. spline Quad. spline Quad. spline Quad. spline
Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes
Year X mun. FE No Yes No Yes
Years before 10+ 10+ 5+ 5+
R2 0.0801 0.6756 0.0513 0.6742
Observations 3.22e+05 3.22e+05 2.82e+05 2.82e+05
Note: *p<0.1, **p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
Table 2: Placebo Regression Discontinuity estimates around the border of Protected Areas
before their establishment
16

Figure 7: Discontinuities in forested area around borders of Protected Areas, before and
after the introduction of the policy
slaudiser
tserof_aera_nl
fo naeM
4.4
1.4
9.3
6.3
3.3
-50 0 50
Distance to border of PA or IT (km) (<0, inside)
mindist_terr_dummy=0
slaudiser
tserof_aera_nl
fo naeM
4.4
1.4
9.3
6.3
3.3
-50 0 50
Distance to border of PA or IT (km) (<0, inside)
mindist_terr_dummy=1
(a) No controls
slaudiser
tserof_aera_nl
fo naeM
01.0
50.0
10.0
40.0-
90.0-
-50 0 50
Distance to border of PA or IT (km) (<0, inside)
mindist_terr_dummy=0
slaudiser
tserof_aera_nl
fo naeM
01.0
50.0
10.0
40.0-
90.0-
-50 0 50
Distance to border of PA or IT (km) (<0, inside)
mindist_terr_dummy=1
(b) Municipality and Year FE’s
Note: This figure compares the discontinuity in forested area around the borders of protected areas, before
and after the implementation of the policy. Each dot represents the mean total log-forested area within
bins of 10km around the border of all protected areas, from 50km inside of 50km outside. The x-axis shows
distancetotheborder,withnegative(positive)valuesindicatingtheareainside(outside)theprotectedarea.
Thetwoleft-handsidepanelsillustratesthesimplerawaverages,pre-andpost-policy. Theright-handpanel
illustratesaveragesoftheresidualsofaregressionoflog-forestedareaonmunicipalityandyearfixedeffects,
pre- and post-policy.
controlling for year and municipality fixed effects, we see evidence of some prior disconti-
nuity (Figure 7 panel (c)), but significantly smaller than the discontinuity after the policy
implementation.
A discontinuity around the border of a future protected area before its implementation
can be due to a number of factors, for example: (i) lengthy legal disputes over the demarca-
tion of new protected areas, during which deforestation decreased before the final settlement
and establishment 7 or (ii) historical occupation of the area by indigenous people whose
livelihood depend on the preservation of the forest before legal demarcation of the protected
territory.
Effects on other outcomes Surprisingly, municipalities that get added to the priority
list see an increase in their agricultural value added as measured in (cite dataset of Contas
Regionais). This seems to be primarily due to three phenomena: (1) A shift away from
pasture towards crops (especially soy and maize, and (2) an increase in the number of cattle
heads per area in pasture.
7This is particularly likely in the case of Indigenous Territories. Their establishment follows a judicial
processthatincludesseveralstages: study, delimitation, declaration, homologation, andregularization, that
can take decades
17

Figure 8: Effects on agricultural profits and crops vs. pasture land use
1
.5
0
-.5
erutlucirgA
ni
deddA
eulaV
)goL(
(Log) Value Added in Agriculture
.6
.4
.2
0
-.2
-7 Year relativ0e to Blacklist entry year 10
(<0 Leads, >0 Lags)
erutlucirgA
ni
deddA
eulaV
)goL(
(Log) Value Added in Agriculture
-7 Year relativ0e to Blacklist entry year 10
(<0 Leads, >0 Lags)
.05
0
-.05
-.1
-.15
aerA
larutlucirgA/erutsaP
erahS
)goL(
(Log) Share Pasture/Agricultural Area
.05
0
-.05
-.1
-.15
-7 Year relativ0e to Blacklist entry year 10
(<0 Leads, >0 Lags)
aerA
larutlucirgA/erutsaP
erahS
)goL(
(Log) Share Pasture/Agricultural Area
-7 Year relativ0e to Blacklist entry year 10
(<0 Leads, >0 Lags)
.4
.2
0
-.2
-.4
ah
rep
sdaeh
elttaC
)goL(
(Log) Cattle heads per ha
.4
.2
0
-.2
-.4
-7 Year relativ0e to Blacklist entry year 10
(<0 Leads, >0 Lags)
ah
rep
sdaeh
elttaC
)goL(
(Log) Cattle heads per ha
-7 Year relativ0e to Blacklist entry year 10
(<0 Leads, >0 Lags)
Note: Thisfigureshowstheβ estimatesfromtheevent-studyspecifiedinEquation1onthreeoutcomesof
τ
interest: log-total value added in agriculture (top row), log of the share of total agricultural area dedicated
to pasture (middle row), and log of total cattle heads per hectare (bottom row). The three panels on
the left consider all 5,568 munipalities in Brazil, whereas the three panels on the right consider only the
municipalities from the Brazilian Legal Amazon, defined by the government as comprising all seven states
from the Northern region of Brazil, plus the states of Maranhao and Mato Grosso.
18

3 Deforestation in Spatial Equilibrium
We build a spatial multi-sector general equilibrium model that explicitly captures the key
features of the spatial distribution of agriculture, the economic forces at play in the market
for land, and frictions to movement of goods and labour via internal trade and migration.
Stylised facts Our theoretical framework is motivated by observed spatial patterns in
deforestation and agriculture across Brazil, as illustrated by Figures 9 and 10. From Figure
9, we can see that areas with more deforestation have lower GDP per capita8, and lower
market access9. From Figure 10, we can see that areas with higher deforestation have lower
agriculture productivity10 and higher share of agricultural area dedicated to pasture, which
is typically much more land intensive than crop growing.
Overall, deforestation seems to happen in poorer and more remote areas, where land is
dedicatedtoactivitiesthataremoreland-intensiveandlessproductive. Therearedifferences
in how costly it is to deforest land, as well as stark differences in agricultural productivities11.
Given the large difference in local economic development, Brazil’s continental dimensions
and large heterogeneities in transportation infra-structure, goods and workers face non-
negligiblemobilitycosts. Moreover, thedemandforagriculturallandisnotperfectlyinelastic
as farmers can adjust land intensity and consumers can choose between different goods
depending on their relative prices.
Mechanisms for leakage In our framework, a local anti-deforestation policy is inter-
preted as an exogenous shock to the local supply of agicultural land. To quantify spatial
leakage, we consider two key mechanism through which a negative supply shock generates
increased deforestation elsewhere. The first mechanism operates through the market for
agricultural goods. A negative shock to the local supply of agricultural land decreases the
supply of agricultural goods. The extent to which this avoided deforestation leaks elsewhere
depends on the extent to which goods are substitutable across space and can be produced
by clearing forest elsewhere. The second mechanism operates through the market for labour.
A local reduction in deforestation coming from a shock decreases the demand for agricul-
8Deforestation in Brazil is strikingly concentrated in space, as illustrated in Figure 1. Out of the 558
micro-regions that make up Brazil, the top 20 account for almost 40% of the total yearly deforestation.
Regions with high levels of deforestation are very different ecologically and economically to the rest of
Brazil.
9Defined by the first order approximation in (Donaldson and Hornbeck, 2016) MA = (cid:80) (τo)σ−1L
d o d o
where τo is the ice-berg trade cost between o and d as estimated in section 6.5
d
10Defined as agriculture revenue per hectare
11Thisistruefortheagriculturalsectorasawhole,aswellasforspatialdifferencesincultivationofspecific
crops. It is also true both when measuring productivity as revenue per hectare and revenue per worker.
19

Figure 9: Correlates of average yearly deforestation rate
atipac
rep
PDG
)gol(
8.2
6.2
4.2
2.2
2
GDP per capita
-2 0 2 4 6 8
(log) Yearly deforestation (sq km)
(a) log GDP per capita
sseccA
tekraM
)gol(
5.31
31
5.21
21
5.11
Market Access
-2 0 2 4 6 8
(log) Yearly deforestation (sq km)
(b) Market access
Note: This figure illustrates the correlation between average yearly deforestation rate and economic char-
acteristics: log-GDP per capita (left panel) and market access (rigth panel - defined as). The dots represent
the mean of the y-axis variable for 50 bins of log-yearly deforestation.
Figure 10: Correlates of average yearly deforestation rate
aerA
larutlucirgA/euneveR
irgA
)gol(
4
5.3
3
5.2
2
5.1
Revenue/Area
-2 0 2 4 6 8
(log) Yearly deforestation (sq km)
(a) Agricultural productivity
erutsap
ni aera
.ga
fo
erahS
59.
9.
58.
8.
57.
7.
Share in pasture
-2 0 2 4 6 8
(log) Yearly deforestation (sq km)
(b) Land intensity
Note: This figure illustrates the correlation between average yearly deforestation rate and economic char-
acteristics: agricultural productivity (left panel - defined as the ration between agricultural revenue and
agricultural area), and share of agricultural land dedicated to pasture (rigth panel). The dots represent the
mean of the y-axis variable for 50 bins of log-yearly deforestation.
tural labour, changing workers’ migration incentives. Inflows of workers to regions without
anti-deforestation policies will increase the demand for agricultural land, raising incentives
to deforest12.
Tocapturethesechannels, ourmodelconsidersdeforestationasanintermediateeconomic
12A useful benchmark is a flat economy where all land is made equal, workers and goods can move freely,
and demand for agricultural land is perfectly inelastic. In this case, leakage would be 100%: banning
deforestation entirely in one region would have no global effect, as it would be perfectly leakeg to other
regions - the demand for agricultural goods would be the sole determinant of the amount of agricultural
land, and hence of the level of deforestation. Our model departs from all of those assumptions in ways that
are consistent with the data.
20

sector that supplies land as a factor of production for agriculture. Regions differ in the
sectoral productivities for agricultural and non-agricultural production, as well as in their
productivity in producing land via deforestation13.
Model features We conceptualise deforestation as an investment in agricultural land that
accumulates over time. Brazil is modelled as a closed economy with domestic trade and mi-
gration14. The model considers Brazil’s 558 microrregions15 indexed by r, which differ on
their sectoral productivities, land endowments, and amenities. The economy is composed
of K+1 sectors: K agricultural commodities that use land and labour as inputs and have
different labour shares, and one non-agricultural sector that uses only labour. Addition-
ally, we consider deforestation as a sector that uses a composite investment good in order
to produce agricultural land for the K agricultural sectors. There is trade between mu-
nicipalities subject to iceberg costs. Consumer preferences are non-homothetic, represented
by the Price-Independent Generalized Linear preference formulation (Boppart, 2014). Final
goods in each sector are a composite of regional varieties aggregated with constant elasticity
of substitution σ and a final agricultural good is a composite of the various agricultural
commodities aggregated with constant elasticity of substitution θ.
The model features a sequence of static spatial equilibria linked by the laws of motion of
land and labour. The law of motion of land is determined by deforestation and the law of
motion of labour is determined by migration and population growth.
Table 3 summarises the estimation of the various structural parameters, described in
detail next.
3.1 Deforestation and the accumulation of agricultural land
Initially, each region r is endowed with L workers, TA units of agricultural land area, and
r0 r0
TN units of terrestrial natural ecosystems which can be converted into agricultural land.
r0
For most of this section, we omit the time subscript and treat the equilibrium as static.
However, since agricultural land accumulates, it is a time-varying quantity. Assuming a fixed
forest regrowth rate ρ, at letting TD be the level of deforestation, agricultural land evolves
rt
13Deforestation productivity can be thought of as region-specific factors that govern how suitable a par-
ticular region is for forest cutting. It can include natural factors (forest density, type of vegetation, altitute,
weather patterns, geographical features), infra-structure and accessibility, the political environment and the
level of enforcement of anti-deforestation laws.)
14See the appendix for a discussion of how international trade might change our results
15This is typically considered the aggregation level that is most closely associated with a local market, see
for example Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2017)
21

Parameter Value Source/Method
Preference Parameters
β Discount rate 0.9
φ Ag. share in price index 0.1 Eckert and Peters (2022)
ν PIGL Preference parameter 0.5 Eckert and Peters (2022)
η Non-homotheticity 0.506 Expenditure Survey Data
(2017/18)
Elasticities of substitution
σ Between origins 9 Eckert and Peters (2022)
θ Between ag. goods 2 Costinot et al. (2016),
Dominguez-Iino (2023)
Production Function
{α } Land share in ag. activities (0.36;0.54;0.71) From 2006 ag. census
k k
χ ,χ ,ι Individual sectoral produc- (2;1.6;12.8) Alvarez (2020)
A NA
tivity shocks distribution
δ Deforestationreturnstoscale 0.5 Two-wayfixedeffectofdefor-
estation on land prices
ψ Elasticity of deforestation 0.32 Regression derived from
TFP to natural area left steady-state deforestation
ρ Forest regrowth rate 0.003 Observed reforestation rates
Trade and Migration parameters
{µo} Bilateral migration utilities residuals Migration flows 2005-2010
d o,d
(cid:15) Dispersion of idiosyncratic 0.633 Migration flows and incomes
tastes from 2010 census
κ Trade costs distance elastic- 0.11 State trade flows in 1999 and
ity 2017
Table 3: Summary of estimation of model parameters
according to
TA = TA(1−ρ)+TD.
rt+1 rt rt
The following simple agricultural land market graph helps visualise how land evolves over
time. In this simple graph land demand is fixed, there is only one region, and the is no forest
regrowth16.
The market for deforestation. Deforestation is modelled as a costly investment in the
production of agricultural land, which is a factor of production for the agricultural sector.
16Figure 16 in the appendix illustrate the case in with there is forest regrowth and the short-run and
long-run land market equilibrium with a forest regrowth ρ and the transition dynamics.
22

Figure 11: The market for agricultural land over time
Note: This graph illustrates supply and demand curves for agricultural land. The blue curve represents a
demand curve coming from the agricultural sector. The red curves represent the supply coming from the
deforestation sector in consecutive time periods. Under the assumption of no regeneration, the equilibrium
quantitiy of one period is the horizontla intercept of the supply curve in the next period.
We can think of deforesters as atomistic agents operating in a perfectly competitive market
where they access forested land, pay the fixed cost of clearing it, and sell it at the price
of agricultural land. We model the aggregate deforestation production function so that it
has decreasing returns to scale. This motivated by the fact that, within each time period,
the forest that is closer to the edge is cheaper to access and clear. This means that each
additionaldollarspentdeforestingislessproductive. Theaggregatedeforestationproduction
function is such that if an amount ID of the final good, bought at price p , is invested in
r r
deforestation, it delivers TD units of agricultural land according to
r
TD = ZD(ID)δ, (4)
r r r
where ZD is the region-specific “deforestation productivity”, and δ ∈ (0,1) governs the
r
returnstoscaleoftheproductionfunction. Thereturnsofeachsquarekilometreofdeforested
land equal the value of agricultural land in a given region, q . We can interpret ZD and δ
r r
as the productivity parameters that dictate the aggregate (convex) costs of deforesting,
CD(TD,p ;ZD,δ) = p (ZD)−1(TD)1.
r r r r r r δ r δ
Our model of the market for deforestation has two defining features. First, land in
23

natural ecosystems is open access, which means that the future value of the forest is fully
discounted17. Second, thereisfreeentryofdeforesters. Accordingly, theyenterthedeforesta-
tion market as long as there are non-negative marginal profits, so that the equilibrium level
of deforestation is when marginal costs, MCD = ∂CD(TD,p ;ZD,δ)/∂TD, equal marginal
r r r r r r
revenues, MRD = q ,
r r
(cid:16)δq (cid:17) δ
TD∗ = (ZD)1− 1 δ r 1−δ . (5)
r r p
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) r
LocalFactors (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
EquilibriumEffects
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Supply side of deforestation. The curve TD∗ q /p is the region-specific deforestation
r r r
supply curve: how deforestation responds to the local relative price of land. It depends on
two parameters δ, the returns to scale of deforestation in one year, and ZD, the location-
r
specific deforestation productivity.
The returns to scale of deforestation δ is taken to be the same for all of Brazil, and it
governs the supply elasticity of deforestation to real land prices, which equals δ . That
1−δ
is, for a 1% increase in the value of agricultural land relative to that region’s price index,
deforestation goes up by δ %. See section 6.2 in the appendix for the estimation of δ.
1−δ
ZD is the source of regional heterogeneity in deforestation costs. It reflects differences in
r
characteristics such as, (i) local environmental conditions that influence how difficult it is to
deforest, such as rainfall and temperature, (ii) the level of enforcement of anti-deforestation
policies, (iii) revenues obtained from the act of deforestation itself, for example through the
sale of wood, and (iv) the option value of keeping land as forest. While most of these things
are difficult to observe and quantify, we correlate them to the calibrated ZD’s and find that
r
the current area of unprotected forest in a region, TF is a strong predictor of ZD. A log-log
r r
modeldoesaremarkablygoodjobatdescribingtheirempiricalrelationshipincross-sectional
data. Therefore, we let
ZD = ZD(TF)ψ.
r r r
It is calibrated so that it perfectly explains observed differences in levels of deforesta-
tion in regions that cannot be explained by agricultural rents and market access, which are
reflected by q and p respectively. In turn, prices are calibrated by inverting a spatial equi-
r r
librium model in each time period, as described in 3.6. Intuitively, we estimate the demand
for agricultural land from farmers, which in turn depends on the demand for agricultural
17Around 50% of deforestation in the Amazon over the past few years has happened in untitled public
lands. From the remaining 50%, about half has happened in rural settlements where land was and half in
private properties. Although the amount of deforestation in private properties is not negligible, about 25%
of the total, rights over forested land are insecure even within private property. This is due to it historically
being often regarded as “unproductive” and thus subject to the ownership claims of squatters. See (Alston
et al., 1999) for an in depth description of property rights in the Brazilian Amazon frontier.
24

products from consumers, and then, using the observed data on deforestation, we calculate
the productivity of deforestation as a residual that rationalises their spatial distribution. To
be more concrete, for a given level of observed deforestation, a region with lower market
access and lower agricultural productivity will have a higher calibrated ZD.
r
3.2 Technology: local demand for workers and land
In order to estimate the demand for land in each region, we first need to impose some struc-
ture on the firms operating in each region. This will determine how they demand different
factors of production, land and workers, given productivities and prices. Productivities will
be treated as exogenous fundamentals to be backed out from the model and prices will
depend on the full (static) equilibrium which takes into account consumer preferences and
trade costs.
There are four broad sectors: three agricultural sectors with varying land intensities,
and non-agriculture which uses no land for production. Regions produce a differentiated
variety of each of these four goods as in Armington (1969) that consumers combine with
Constant Elasticity of Substitution as in Anderson (1979). The market in each of the four
sectors is composed of perfectly competitive firms with constant returns to scale. The local
non-agricultural goods are a product of only labour with regional productivity ZNA, so that
r
YNA = ZNALNA. The agricultural goods, indexed by k, are a Cobb-Douglas function of land
r r r
and labour with constant returns to scale and regional productivities ZAk, and a share of
r
land equal to α , so that
k
YAk = ZAk(LAk)1−α k(TAk)α k.
r r r r
Goods of sector s are produced to be sold at origin prices pso.
In a competitive equilibrium, the rental rate of agricultural land v equals the marginal
r
product of agricultural land and the wages in each sector equal the marginal product of
labour in each sector. Assuming simple adaptive expectations (i.e. agents assume the future
rental rate of land equals today’s) and a discount rate of β, land should be priced at its
expected present value,
1
q = v .
r r
1−β(1−ρ)
Our data allows us to get agricultural revenues (see section 3.6) and use them to get v as
r
(cid:88) pAkrYAk
v = α r .
r k TAk
k r
25

Wage gaps and occupational choice. In order to allow for a gap between agricultural
and non-agricultural wages, as we consistently find in the data, we rely on a model like the
one introduced by Lagakos and Waugh (2013) and applied to the context of Brazil in Alvarez
(2020). In this model, individuals draw idiosyncratic productivities for agriculture and non
agriculture from a joint distribution F(zA,zNA) and given their observed productivities for
i i
each sector18. Workers choose sector in order to maximise their wage income, so that they
work in non-agriculture if and only if zNAwNA ≥ zAwA. Firms set wages per efficiency unit
ri r ir r
(wA, wNA) that equal the marginal product of a worker with unit productivity in that sector.
r r
By Ls we refer to the total labour efficiency units in sector s ∈ {A,NA} in region r, which is
r
equal to the number of workers multiplied by the expected productivity of those who choose
to work in sector s. Since the idiosyncratic productivities in each sector are not independent
draws, there will be income gaps, the average wage income (yLA,yLNA) will not be equalised
r r
across sectors.
Estimating α . To estimate α for each agricultural commodity k, we use data from the
k k
2006 agricultural census on area planted in each type of agriucltural activity TAk, workers
r
in type of agricultural activity NAk, labour incomes per capita in agriculture yLA, and land
r r
value q .
r
The Cobb-Douglas functional form of the agricultural production function and the zero-
profit condition together imply that
α (cid:80)R v TAk
k = r=1 r r .
1−α (cid:80)R yLANAk
k r=1 r r
Doing this we find that the land share for pastures, temporary crops, and perennials vary
significantly and they are, respectively: 0.71, 0.54, and 0.36. These differences make it so
that there is greater substitutability between land and labour in agricultural production as
a whole. This has important implications for leakage. Consider a region where the supply
of agricultural workers increases. This could be due to more migration from regions where
conservation policies have been enacted. Higher supply of agricultural workers increases the
demand for agricultural land. In a model with multiple agricultural sectors, however, it
might also shift land use away from very land intensive activities, for example cattle ranch-
ing, towards more labour intensive ones, such as perennial crops. The extent to which this
happens in equilibrium would depend mainly on consumers willingness to substitute con-
sumption between goods and on the slope of the supply of deforestation. If deforestation
18The joint distribution is taken to be, as in Alvarez (2020), a Frank copula or two Frechet distributions
with shape parameter χA and χNA and correlation ι
26

is very cheap and consumers very reluctant to substitute towards less land-intensive goods,
cattle-ranching will remain preferable and the inflow of workers will lead to much defor-
estation. By contrast, in a region where deforestation is very costly and consumers readily
substitute beef with soy, the increased supply of labour will mean farmers may opt to convert
pastures to soy fields and demand very little deforestation.
3.3 Preferences: demand for goods
Having characterised the factors that determine the demand for agricultural land given the
prices of agricultural goods, we now turn our attention to the preferences that governs the
demand side of agricultural goods markets.
Non-homothetic preferences between agricultural and non-agricultural goods.
ConsumershavePIGLpreferencesasinBoppart(2014)overagriculturalandnonagricultural
goods such that the expenditure share in agricultural goods of a consumer with expenditure
e equals
(cid:32) (cid:33) (cid:32) (cid:33)−η
pA e
ϑA(e,p(cid:126)) = φ+ν .
pNA p
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
relativepriceeffectIncomeeffect
Where pA and pNA are prices of agricultural and non-agricultural sector, p is the price of the
composite consumption good p ≡ (pA)φ(pNA)1−φ, e is total expenditure, and η, γ, and ν are
exogenous parameters.
CES aggregation between goods. The agricultural good is, in turn, a CES aggregate
of agricultural goods k ∈ {beef, temporary crops, permanent crops} with elasticity of sub-
(cid:16) (cid:17) 1
stitution θ, so that the agricultural price index pA is equal to pA ≡ (cid:80)K (pAk)1−θ 1−θ and
k=1
(cid:16) (cid:17)1−θ
the share of agricultural good k in the overall agricultural expenditure is given by
pAk
.
pA
CES aggregation between origins. Each of the 3+1 final goods (the three agricultural
goods and the non-agricultural good) is, in turn, a CES composite of differentiated regional
varieties produced in region r, with a constant elasticity of substitution σ. Trade is taken
to have symmetric iceberg trade costs τo ≥ 1 that do not vary by good so that a consumer
d
from region d pays the origin price of a good from region o scaled by the bilateral iceberg
trade cost. Thus, the share of goods g (which can be beef, temporary crops, perennials, or
27

non-agricultural goods) consumed in region d, that is produced in region o, is given by19
(τo)1−σ(pgr)1−σ
πgo = d . (6)
d (cid:80)R (τr)1−σ(pgr)1−σ
r=1 d
We take σ from Eckert and Peters (2022) to be 9.20 Having a value for σ, we use inter-
state trade flow data from 1999 and 2017 to estimate a gravity equation derived from 6
along with the assumption that the iceberg trade costs depend on distance according to
τo = (distance+1)κ. See section 6.5 in the appendix to see this estimation.
d
3.4 Market clearing: closing the model
In order to close the model, we equalise the revenues from producers of good g from origin o
to the sum of the expenditures of consumers in that good from across all regions d of Brazil.
These expenditures equal the trade share of d to o times the total consumption of region d
in good g,
R
(cid:88)
pgoYg = πgoXg. (7)
o d d
d=1
Aggregate consumption in a region. The overall expenditure of a region in each good
can be calculated in three steps. First, we estimate the aggregate share of consumer expen-
diture in agriculture ϑA, which will depend on the PIGL preference parameters, the relative
r
priceofagriculturalgoods, theaggregateexpenditure, andthedistributionofincomesasdic-
tated by wages and the joint distribution of productivity shocks21. Then, given the fact that
the investment good is a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of the agricultural and non-agricultural
goods with share φ, the total agricultural and non-agricultural expenditures equal
XA = ϑAE +φp ID, XNA = (1−ϑA)E +(1−φ)p ID (8)
r r r r r r r r r r
19To differentiate between origin and destination prices we shall indicate the region of origin with a
superscript and the region of destination with a subscript. Then the farm-gate price of temporary crops
fromoispA,temp,o,thepriceoftemporarycropsfromofacedbyconsumersindispA,temp,o =pA,temp,oτo,and
d d
the consumer price index of temporary crops in destination d equals pA,temp = (cid:80)R (τo)1−σ(pA,temp,o)1−σ.
d o=1 d
20Given that our context is closer to Domiguez-Iino (2021), we will also calibrate the model and simulate
counterfactuals with values up to σ = 15, given his estimated elasticity of substitution between “counties”
in Brazil and Argentina of around 13.
21Given the non-homothetic nature of preferences for agricultural goods and the fact that there is within-
region inequality due to the productivity shocks introduced to generate a wage gap, the formula for the
region-wideagriculturalshareisnotveryconciseandcanbefoundintheappendixinsection6.1. Intuitively,
in the face of higher inequality, the share of expenditure in agriculture will be lower because a higher share
of earnings will accrue to those who spend proportionally less in agriculture.
28

where E is the total consumer expenditure in a region and ID the total investment in
r r
deforestation. Because of the CES preferences between agricultural goods, the expenditure
(cid:16) (cid:17)1−θ
in agricultural good k equals XAk = XA pA r k . Finally, the total consumer expenditure
r r pA
r
equals the total income, labour income plus land rental rate payments, net of deforestation
investments,
E = yLL +v TA −p ID.
r r r r r r r
where yL is the average wage income in region r across all worker, equal to sAyLA + (1 −
r r r
sA)yLNA.
r r
Equilibrium definition. Consider the economy described above. Let the initial agri-
cultural land area in each region {TA} , the initial level of area under terrestrial natural
r0 r
ecosystems {TN} , and the distribution of workers across space {N } be given as exoge-
r0 r r r
nous. A competitive equilibrium is a set of prices {ps} , wages {ws} , land rental rates
r r,s r r
{v } , occupational choices {Ns} , regional deforestation levels {TD} , and regional expen-
r r r r,s r r
diture shares {ϑA} such that:
r r
1. consumers’ choices maximize utility (equation (12));
2. the demand for regional varieties follows equations (6);
3. firms’ factor demands maximize firms’ profits;
4. marginal product of labour is equalised across sectors
5. local markets clear and there is trade balance (7).
3.5 Migration
As in Eckert and Peters (2022), individuals born in a location of origin o can choose to live
in destination d according to the migration costs µ , the utility at the destination V(e ,p ),
od d d
the famenities at destination d, B , and an idiosyncratic shock ν (i), drawn from a Frechet
d d
distribution with parameter (cid:15). The origin-destination specific migration utility U is given
od
by:
U (i) = V(e ,p )B µ ν (i).
od d d d od d
29

Therefore, from the Frechet nature of the shock, the share of people who move from o to d
is given by the following expression22
(V(e ,p )µ B )(cid:15)
d d od d
ρ = .
od
R
(cid:88)
(V(e ,p )µ B )(cid:15)
r r or r
r=1
Hence the law of motion of population will be given by the following equations
R
(cid:88)
N = ρ N , N = gN N
dt rd ot ot ot−1 ot−1
o=1
where gN is the growth rate of population in origin region o at time t.
ot−1
3.6 Data and model inversion
Data for the empirical analysis of our study comes from a variety of publicly available
sources for Brazil, comprising information on land use, agricultural activity, local economies,
internal trade, migration, and household expenditure. All the sources listed here are publicly
available.
Model inversion. Inordertoinvertthemodelandbackoutthetotalfactorproductivities
of each sector and the deforestation productivity (ZAk, ZNA, ZD) we assume that each year
rt rt rt
in the period 2003-2019 the economy is in equilibrium as described above and we use data on
some observed features. First, we use data on the endowments that are treated as exogenous
within each equilibrium. Namely, population, already agricultural land, and land in natural
ecosystems. Second, we use data on the following equilibrium quantities in each region for
that year: (i) the total amount of deforestation, TD, (ii) the agricultural labour share (sA),
rt rt
(iii) the share of agricultural land in each land use (TAk), and (iv) agricultural revenues
rt
(pAkrYAk).
t rt
Land use. Data on land use comes from the MapBiomas project, a multi-institution col-
laborative initiative that processes satellite images into publicly available datasets on land
use for the Brazilian territory. The dataset we use contains pixel-level (30m resolution) of
land use from Brazil between 1985 and 2020, which we aggregate to the micro-region level
for the model calibration. It contains many land use categories which we aggregate into 5
22Note that this includes ρ , i.e. the share of people from region o who choose to stay in region o.
oo
Typically, this will be a larger share than ρ for o(cid:54)=d
od
30

categories: natural ecosystems (comprised mostly of forests and to a lesser extent natural
savannahs), pastures, temporary crops, perennials, and other (mostly urban, mining, water
bodies, ice, and missing data).
Agricultural data. We need agricultural data for two main purposes. First, the estima-
tion of some parameters of the model. Specifically α and δ. Second, for the construction of
k
the micro-region level agricultural revenue data that is used to invert the model.
In the estimation of α , we rely on the 2006 Agricultural Census, a census of the universe
k
of farming establishments. Using data on land prices, land in each agricultural activity,
labour in each agricultural activity, and agricultural wages, we estimate how the ration of
land income over rental income varies between pastures for cattle grazing, temporary crops,
and perennials. For the estimation of δ, we rely on a fixed-effects log-log regression of
deforestation rates on yearly municipality-level estimates of the land rental rates. Given the
absence of panel on agricultural rental rates, we construct them in a way that is consistent
with our model from our yearly estimates of agricultural revenues.
The estimation of the yearly agricultural revenues is done in two different ways. The Mu-
nicipal Survey on Agricultural Production (PAM), provides yearly estimates of the revenues
of 71 different crops, which we aggregate into two categories: temporary and perennial, in
a way that is consistent with their classification in the agricultural census. These estimates
yield very similar values to those in the agricultural census in 2006. Instead of relying on
the PAM alone, we construct an region-level index of the PAM revenues that equals one in
2006 and multiply them by the 2006 Agricultural Census data.23
NodataonyearlyrevenuesfromcattleranchingatthemunicipalitylevelexistsforBrazil,
so we leverage data on other sources that cover the dimensions governing yearly revenue
changes: the number of cows, the weight of each cow, and the price of beef. We obtain
yearly estimates of the number of cows in each municipality from the Municipal Survey on
Livestock Production (PPM). We obtain data on yearly national variation in the price of
beef in each year from a daily time series curated by the School of Agricultural Studies
of the University of Sa˜o Paulo24. We obtain yearly state-level data on the average weight
of slaughtered cows from the national statistical office’s Quarerly Survey of Salughtered
Animals. Given the average age of a cow at the time of slaughter is 3 years, we estimate
yearly cattle revenues by multiplying the 3-year lagged change in weight, number of cows
and price of beef by the 2006 revenue data from the Agricultural Census25.
23R (cid:92) eveue AK =RevenueAK,AgCensus×
RevenueA
rt
K,PAM
rt r2006 RevenueAK,PAM
r2006
24Available for public consultation at: https://www.cepea.esalq.usp.br/br/indicador/boi-gordo.aspx
25This extrapolation over time requires the assumption that the yearly changes in the price of beef can be
31

Labour and Migration. Data on micro-region level labour markets comes from 10%
samples of the 2000 and 2010 National Census, which is representative at the municipal level
(smaller than the micro-region), made publicly available by IBGE. For each municipality,
we compute the share of individuals who report working in the agricultural sector, as well
as the average municipal earnings for agricultural and non-agricultural activities. We get
the number of workers in agricultural and non agriculture for both of these years and then,
for each micro-region, we linearly interpolate and extrapolate these values to approximate
their time series from 2003 to 2019. Given the static nature of the equilibrium concept, it
is not too important to accurately measure relative yearly changes in population and labour
shares, but to get the levels right. Therefore, we think that the errors introduced by this
approximation are unlikely to change our main results. We also use the 2010 census to
obtain information on internal migration, as respondents are also asked to report in which
municipality they lived 5 years prior to data collection.
Trade. Data on interstate trade flows comes from (de Vasconcelos, 2001), as cited by
Morten and Oliveira (2018). We use trade flows in 1999 and 2017 and get similar estimates
for the distance elasticity of trade flows, which is what we use to calculate iceberg costs.
Preferences. Finally, we use the 2017-2018 Household Expenditure Survey (POF) to es-
timate the preference parameter that governs the non-homotheticity in individual utility.
We construct household expenditure shares on food and non-food items, as a proxy for
consumption of agricultural goods.
3.7 Calibrated productivities
In this theoretical framework, a high level of deforestation is rationalised by either the
demand for agricultural land or the supply of deforestation. The supply-side regional fun-
damental governing deforestation is ZD. The demand for agricultural land is given, in turn,
r
by the equilibrium in the market for agricultural goods. From the agricultural goods supply
side, we expect to see more deforestation in regions which have higher agricultural TFPs,
especially for the land-intensive agricultural activities (i.e. cattle grazing). From the de-
mand side, the regions that have higher market access should experience greater demand for
agricultural goods, and hence for agricultural land, as discussed in Donaldson and Hornbeck
(2016). In summary, there are three sets regional fundamentals driving the spatial allocation
of deforestation, each of which have different implications for the level of leakage: (1) the
considered as constant across all municipalities, and that yearly changes on average slaughtered weight can
be considered constant across all municipalities within a given state.
32

deforestation TFP, (2) the TFP of agricultural activities, especially the most land-intensive
ones, and (3) market access. Table 4 presentes the estimated coefficients of a simple re-
gression of the baseline levels of (log) deforestation on the (log) productivities of various
sectors and the log of a measure of market access approximated by MA ≈ (cid:80) (τr)σ−1L
r d d d
as in Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016). Column 1 shows that deforestation is well explained
(R2 = 0.923) by the combination of those factors but that the largest share of the explana-
tory power comes from the TFP of deforestation, the immobile factor that we are shocking
through the counterfactual policy simulation.
Outcome: log-observed annual deforestation
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(log) temp. crops TFP -0.54∗∗∗ -0.21∗∗∗ 0.10∗∗∗
[0.04] [0.03] [0.00]
(log) perm. crops TFP -0.39∗∗∗ 0.03 -0.00
[0.03] [0.03] [0.00]
(log) pasture TFP -0.16∗∗∗ -0.61∗∗∗ 1.14∗∗∗
[0.05] [0.04] [0.01]
(log) non-ag TFP 1.08∗∗∗ 0.67∗∗∗ -0.38∗∗∗
[0.03] [0.03] [0.00]
(log) Market acces -1.19∗∗∗ 0.26∗∗∗
[0.02] [0.00]
(log) Deforestation TFP 1.39∗∗∗ 1.90∗∗∗
[0.01] [0.00]
R2 0.122 0.306 0.811 0.987
Dep. Var. Mean 2.69 2.69 2.69 2.69
Dep. Var. SD 1.95 1.95 1.95 1.95
Observations 8587 8587 8587 8587
Table 4: Correlates of observed deforestation
33

4 Counterfactual Analysis
The theoretical framework developed in the previous section allows us to simulate counter-
factual scenarios of local deforestation policy, and understand how deforestation would have
evolved in general equilibrium in these alternative scenarios. In particular, we can apply
our model to analyse the national impact of the two types of local anti-deforestation policies
implemented by the Brazilian government over the past decades (Prority List and Protected
Areas), taking into account general equilibrium effects driven by leakage.
For each of the two policies, we simulate two counterfactual scenarios for the evolution
of nation-wide deforestation between the years 2003 and 2018.
Counterfactual A: No policy – a scenario in which, between 2003 and 2018, the
policy was never enacted.
Counterfactual B: Policy, no leakage – a scenario in which, between 2003 and
2018, the policy was implemented, but leakage to other areas is not possible
ThedifferencebetweencounterfactualAandtheobservedevolutionofdeforestationmea-
sures the overall effect of the policy, including both the direct effect via banned deforestation
in targeted areas, and the indirect effect via potential leakage to non-targeted areas. The
differencebetweentheobservedevolutionofdeforestationandcounterfactualBmeasuresthe
amount of leakage caused by the localised policies. The difference between counterfactuals
A and B measures the total effect of the localised policies under no deforestation leakage,
i.e. only considering the direct effect via banned deforestation in targeted areas.
For each of the two policies, we construct the counterfactuals as follows: First, we cali-
brate the baseline regional fundamentals {Zs, B } to fit the observed deforestation between
rt rt
the years of 2003 and 2018. We construct (ZD)nopolicy, the deforestation productivity of each
rt
region in a counterfactual scenario wihtout the policy was not implemented as:
(ZD)nopolicy = Z D (TF +TPT )ψ (9)
rt rt rt r,t
Where TF is the remaining observed area of unprotected forest in region r at time t and
rt
TPT is the area belonging to region r that is observed to be under a local conservation
r,t
policy at time t. In a counterfactual with no policy, this area is considered to be unprotected
forest.
For counterfactual A, we simulate total land cleared for agriculture in each year between
2003 and 2018, solving for the optimal deforestation level (TD)nopolicy according to Equation
rt
34

5 using the calculated regional deforestation productivity (ZD)nopolicy. Total agricultural
rt
land at each period is then given by equation 10.
(TA)nopolicy = (1−ρ)(TA )nopolicy +(TD)nopolicy (10)
rt rt−1 rt
For counterfactual B, we calculate a “no leakage” scenario that has the implied prices
coming from counterfactual A (i.e. no-policy prices), and baseline region deforestation pro-
ductivitiescalibratedfromthemodelZD (withpolicy). Fixingthepricesundertheno-policy
r
scenario effectively shuts down the channel through which deforestation could leak to other
areas, as both labors market and goods market relocation mechanisms operate through price
channel.
(cid:16) (q )nopolicy(cid:17) δ
(TD)noleakage = δ r 1−δ(ZD)1− 1 δ (11)
r (p )nopolicy r
r
Figure 12: Counterfactual deforestation: Priority List policy
)mk
qs
0001(
noitatserofeD
evitalumuC
008
006
004
002
0
Cumulative Deforestation
2003 2007 2011 2015 2019
year
Priority List Policy No Priority List
Priority List Policy, no leakage
Note: This figure illustrates the evolution of total cumulative deforestation across the entire country in
thousands of squared kilometers between the years of 2003 and 2019 under counterfactual simulations based
on the Priority List policy. The blue curve represents observed deforestation, the red curve represents
a counterfactual scenario in which the policy was never implemented, and the green curve represents a
counterfactual in which the policy was implemented and spatial leakage is shut down by considering the
prices under the no-policy scenario.
35

Figure 13: Cumulative leakage from Priority List policy
stniop
egatnecreP
01
8
6
4
2
Percentage (Cumulative) Leakage
Area Deforested
2007 2011 2015 2019
year
Note: This figure illustrates the evolution of total estimated deforestation leakage under the Priority List
policy between the years of 2007 and 2019. Leakage as calculated as the ratio between: total increase in
deforestationinnon-targetedareas(differecebetweenobserveddeforestationandthesimulateddeforestation
in a counterfactual where prices do not adjust to policy), and total avoided deforestation in targeted areas
(differencebetweensimulateddeforestationinacounterfactualwherethepolicywasneverimplementedand
the simulated deforestation in a counterfactual where the leakage channel is shut down). A leakage of 100%
would mean that the entire deforestation reduction caused by the localised policies is outdone by increases
in deforestation in other regions.
Figure 12 shows the evolution in total observed deforestation across Brazil, as well as the
results from simulating counterfactuals A and B for the Priority List Policy. We can see that,
in a counterfactual where the priority list polciy is never implemented, total deforestation
between 2003 and 2009 would rise from around 450 thousand km2 to around 700 thousand
km2. Figure 13 illustrates the evolution of the cumulative leakage to non-treated areas
expressed as a share of the avoided deforestation. Leakage at the start of the considered
period is low, below 3%, but increases gradually over time. By 2019, approximately 10%
of the deforestation avoided by the policy in the targeted areas is outdone by spillovers
elsewhere.
Figures 14 and 15 illustrate the same results for the Protected Areas policy. From Figure
14, we can see that, in counterfactual scenario without the Protected Areas, deforestation
increases by much less than in counterfactual without the Priority List policy; from around
450 thousand km2 to around 500 thousand km2 between 2003 and 2019. From Figure 15, we
can see that leakage in the Protected Areas policy follows a similar pattern to leakage under
the Priority Lists policy: it starts at a low value of about 5%, and increases gradually over
time to just over 15% at the end of our considered period.
36

Figure 14: Counterfactual deforestation: Protected Areas policy
)mk
qs
0001(
noitatserofeD
evitalumuC
006
004
002
0
Cumulative Deforestation
2003 2007 2011 2015 2019
year
PA (data) No PA (simul.)
PA, no leakage (simul.)
Note: This figure illustrates the evolution of total cumulative deforestation across the entire country in
thousands of squared kilometers between the years of 2003 and 2019 under counterfactual simulations based
on the Protected Areas policy. The blue curve represents observed deforestation, the red curve represents
a counterfactual scenario in which the policy was never implemented, and the green curve represents a
counterfactual in which the policy was implemented and spatial leakage is shut down by considering the
prices under the no-policy scenario.
Overall, the conclusion from our simulation exercise is that, even though there is a
detectable amount of leakage to non-targeted areas in localised anti-deforestation policies,
it does not mean that such policies are ineffective in reducing global deforestation. Both
localized policies implemented by the Brazilian government over the past decades were not
only effective in reducing deforestation locally, but were able to retain more than 80% of this
effect when considering national deforestation levels. This finding suggests that concerns
about leakage outdoing the majority of gains in localised anti-deforestation policies might
be unwarranted, and that these policies may be effective in reducing global forest loss.
5 Conclusion
To what extent do spatially targeted policies are globally effective when considering the
possible geographical displacement of environmental damage as a response to the policy?
The answer to this question has deep implications for policy design, given the global public
good nature of ecosystem conservation. We address this issue in the context of tropical
deforestation - an activity that has been responsible for one-fifth of global CO2 emissions in
37

Figure 15: Cumulative leakage from the Protected Areas policy
stniop
egatnecreP
81
61
41
21
01
Percentage (Cumulative) Leakage
2007 2011 2015 2019
year
Note: ThisfigureillustratestheevolutionoftotalestimateddeforestationleakageundertheProtectedAreas
policy between the years of 2007 and 2019. Leakage as calculated as the ratio between: total increase in
deforestationinnon-targetedareas(differecebetweenobserveddeforestationandthesimulateddeforestation
in a counterfactual where prices do not adjust to policy), and total avoided deforestation in targeted areas
(differencebetweensimulateddeforestationinacounterfactualwherethepolicywasneverimplementedand
the simulated deforestation in a counterfactual where the leakage channel is shut down). A leakage of 100%
would mean that the entire deforestation reduction caused by the localised policies is outdone by increases
in deforestation in other regions.
the past two decades - in Brazil - home to a third of the world’s remaining rainforests.
The issue of conservation leakage is intrinsically a general equilibrium problem in space:
a policy crackdown on deforestation in a spatially delimited region changes economic incen-
tives through a shock to the price of deforested land, generating both sectoral and spatial
reallocation. This reallocation depends on the costs of deforestation, the productivity of
industries with varying land-intensity, consumers’ substitution elasticities between goods
and between origins, trade costs, regional amenities and migration frictions. Consequently,
reduced-form evaluations conflate deforestation reduction in targeted areas with leakage to
non-targeted ones. To separate these two effects, we develop a multi-sector spatial economic
model of the Brazilian economy. Given the tight link between deforestation and agriculture,
we model agricultural land as the endogenous output of a deforestation sector intermediate
to the production of agricultural goods.
We apply our framework to quantify the global effects on national deforestation of two
spatially targeted policies implemented by the Brazilian government over the past decades:
the establishment of priority regions with high levels of illegal deforestation that receive
extra resources for command and control, and the delimitation of protected areas with high
38

forest coverage where deforestation is entirely banned. We find that both policies are highly
effective in reducing global deforestation. Over a period of 12 years, leakage outside of
targeted areas undoes between 10% and 15% of the policy impact in targeted areas.
Overall, we show that localised policies can be effective in reducing overall deforestation.
Our theoretical framework provides a useful starting point to answer other questions of inter-
est that require a spatial general equilibrium model of the relationship between deforestation
and agricultural goods. Future research can build on our framework to study, for example,
other indirect consequences of deforestation such as its impact on rainfall in nearby areas
(Leite-Filho et al., 2021), or the role of technological change in agriculture on environmental
conservation.
39

References
L. J. Alston, G. D. Libecap, and B. Mueller. Titles, Conflict, and Land Use: The Develop-
ment of Property Rights and Land Reform on the Brazilian Amazon Frontier. University
of Michigan Press, 1999. ISBN 9780472110063. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/
10.3998/mpub.16208.
J. A. Alvarez. The agricultural wage gap: Evidence from brazilian micro-data. Ameri-
can Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 12(1):153–73, January 2020. doi: 10.1257/mac.
20170436. URL https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/mac.20170436.
J. E. Anderson. A theoretical foundation for the gravity equation. The American Economic
Review, 69(1):106–116, 1979. ISSN 00028282. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/
1802501.
P. S. Armington. A theory of demand for products distinguished by place of production
(une th´eorie de la demande de produits diff´erenci´es d’apr`es leur origine) (una teor´ıa de
la demanda de productos distingui´endolos segu´n el lugar de produccio´n). Staff Papers
(International Monetary Fund), 16(1):159–178, 1969. ISSN 00208027. URL http://www.
jstor.org/stable/3866403.
J. Assun¸c˜ao and R. Rocha. Getting greener by going black: the effect of blacklisting mu-
nicipalities on amazon deforestation. Environment and Development Economics, 24(2):
115–137, 2019. doi: 10.1017/S1355770X18000499.
J. Assunc¸˜ao, C. Gandour, and R. Rocha. Deforestation slowdown in the brazilian amazon:
prices or policies? Environment and Development Economics, 20(6):697–722, 2015. doi:
10.1017/S1355770X15000078.
T. Boppart. Structural change and the kaldor facts in a growth model with relative price
effects and non-gorman preferences. Econometrica, 82(6):2167–2196, 2014. doi: https://
doi.org/10.3982/ECTA11354. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
3982/ECTA11354.
J. Brner and S. Wunder. Paying for avoided deforestation in the brazilian amazon: from
cost assessment to scheme design. International Forestry Review, 10(3):496–511, 2008.
R. Burgess, M. Hansen, B. A. Olken, P. Potapov, and S. Sieber. The political economy
of deforestation in the tropics. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(4):1707–1754,
2012. ISSN 00335533, 15314650. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/41812147.
40

R. Burgess, F. Costa, and B. A. Olken. The brazilian amazon’s double reversal of fortune.
2019.
P. Bustos, B. Caprettini, and J. Ponticelli. Agricultural productivity and structural trans-
formation: Evidence from brazil. American Economic Review, 106(6):1320–65, June 2016.
doi: 10.1257/aer.20131061. URLhttps://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.
20131061.
S. Calonico, M. D. Cattaneo, and R. Titiunik. Robust nonparametric confidence intervals
for regression-discontinuity designs. Econometrica, 82(6):2295–2326, 2014.
CNA and CEPEA. Pib do agroneg´ocio. 2023.
B. R. Copeland and M. S. Taylor. Trade, growth, and the environment. Journal of Economic
Literature, 42(1):7–71, March 2004. doi: 10.1257/002205104773558047. URL https:
//www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/002205104773558047.
X. Cui. Climate change and adaptation in agriculture: Evidence from us cropping
patterns. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 101:102306, 2020.
ISSN 0095-0696. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2020.102306. URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0095069620300292.
J. M. C. da Silva, L. C. F. Barbosa, J. Topf, I. C. G. Vieira, and F. R. Scarano. Minimum
costs to conserve 80% of the brazilian amazon. Perspectives in Ecology and Conservation,
20(3):216–222, 2022.
J. R. de Vasconcelos. Matriz do fluxo de com´ercio interestadual de bens e servi¸cos no brasil
– 1999. Job market paper, August 2001.
R. Dix-Carneiro and B. K. Kovak. Trade liberalization and regional dynamics. American
Economic Review, 107(10):2908–2946, 2017.
T. Domiguez-Iino. Efficiency and redistribution in environmental policy: An equilibrium
analysis of agricultural supply chains. 2021.
D. Donaldson and R. Hornbeck. Railroads and american economic growth: A “market
access” approach. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2):799–858, 02 2016. ISSN
0033-5533. doi: 10.1093/qje/qjw002. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjw002.
DOU. Lei nº 6.321, de 21 de dezembro de 2007. Di´ario Oficial [da] Repu´blica Federativa do
Brasil, 2007.
41

DOU. Lei nº 12.651, de 25 de maio de 2012. Di´ario Oficial [da] Repu´blica Federativa do
Brasil, 2012.
F. Eckert and M. Peters. Spatial structural change. Working Paper 30489, National Bureau
of Economic Research, September 2022. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w30489.
F. Farrokhi and H. S. Pellegrina. Global trade and margins of productivity in agriculture.
Working Paper 27350, National Bureau of Economic Research, June 2020. URL http:
//www.nber.org/papers/w27350.
´
B. Herrendorf, R. Rogerson, and Akos Valentinyi. Chapter 6 - growth and structural trans-
formation. In P. Aghion and S. N. Durlauf, editors, Handbook of Economic Growth,
volume 2 of Handbook of Economic Growth, pages 855–941. Elsevier, 2014. doi: https://
doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-53540-5.00006-9. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/B9780444535405000069.
A. Hsiao. Coordination and commitment in international climate action: Evidence from
palm oil. 2021.
IPCC. Ipcc, 2019: Climate change and land: an ipcc special report on climate change, deser-
tification, land degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and greenhouse
gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems. 2019.
S.Jayachandran, J.deLaat, E.F.Lambin, C.Y.Stanton, R.Audy, andN.E.Thomas. Cash
for carbon: A randomized trial of payments for ecosystem services to reduce deforestation.
Science, 357(6348):267–273, 2017. doi: 10.1126/science.aan0568. URL https://www.
science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.aan0568.
D. Lagakos and M. E. Waugh. Selection, agriculture, and cross-country productivity differ-
ences. American Economic Review, 103(2):948–80, April 2013. doi: 10.1257/aer.103.2.948.
URL https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.103.2.948.
A. T. Leite-Filho, B. S. Soares-Filho, J. L. Davis, G. M. Abrah˜ao, and J. B¨orner. De-
forestation reduces rainfall and agricultural revenues in the brazilian amazon. Nature
Communications, 12(1):2591, 2021. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-22840-7. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22840-7.
M. Morten and J. Oliveira. The effects of roads on trade and migration: Evidence from a
planned capital city. 2018.
42

H. S. Pellegrina and S. Sotelo. Migration, specialization, and trade: Evidence from brazil’s
marchtothewest. WorkingPaper28421, NationalBureauofEconomicResearch, January
2021. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w28421.
A. Pfaff and J. Robalino. Spillovers from conservation programs. Annual Review of Re-
source Economics, 9(1):299–315, 2017. doi: 10.1146/annurev-resource-100516-053543.
URL https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-resource-100516-053543.
E. Souza-Rodrigues. Deforestation in the Amazon: A Unified Framework for Estimation and
Policy Analysis. The Review of Economic Studies, 86(6):2713–2744, 12 2018. ISSN 0034-
6527. doi: 10.1093/restud/rdy070. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/restud/rdy070.
D. Szerman, J. Assun¸ca˜o, M. Lipscomb, and A. M. Mobarak. Agricultural produc-
tivity and deforestation: Evidence from brazil. Working Paper 1091, Yale Eco-
nomic Growth Center, January 2022. URL https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/
egcenter-discussion-paper-series/1091.
6 Appendix
6.1 Deriving local expenditure by sector
Wages in equilibrium assuming Frechet Frank-copula. Let the joint distribution
of pairs of individual productivities (zA,zNA) is given by the Frank copula as in LW with
ir ir
parameters (χA,χNA,ρ). Then there are no simple closed-form expressions for the share of
employment in agriculture and the labour income in each sector. Instead,
(cid:90) ∞(cid:90) zAwA/wNA
(cid:2) (cid:3) r r
sA = Pr zNA/zA ≤ wA/wNAr = f(zA,zNA)dzNAdzA
r ir ir r r
0 0
yLA =
wAE(cid:2)
zA
(cid:12)
(cid:12)zNA/zA ≤ wA/wNAr
(cid:3)
= wA
1
(cid:90) ∞(cid:90) zAw
r
A/w
r
NA
zAf(zA,zNA)dzNAdzA
r r ir ir ir r r r sA
r 0 0
yLNA =
wNAE(cid:2)
zNA
(cid:12)
(cid:12)zNA/zA > wA/wNAr
(cid:3)
= wNA
1 (cid:90) ∞(cid:90) ∞
zNAf(zNA,zNA)dzNAdzA
r r ir ir ir r r r sNA
r 0 zAwA/wNA
r r
Aggregate agricultural expenditure share in each region The share of consumer
expenditure in agriculture of a household with expenditure e equals
i
(cid:16) pA (cid:17)(cid:16) (cid:17)−η
ϑA = φ+ν r e pη. (12)
ir pNA ir r
r
43

Figure 16: Agricultural Land Accumulation with Forest Regrowth
Note: This figure illustrates the transition dynamics in the market for agricultural land under a constant
forest regrowth rate. The graph on the left shows supply and demand curves for land, and the equation
for the equilibrium in the market for the equilibrium quantity. The graph on the right shows the transition
curve for agricultural land: with forest regrowth, deforestation reaches a steady state, where the blue curve
intercepts the 45-degree line.
”
Thus, the total agricultural expenditure in region r equals
(cid:90) (cid:16) pA (cid:17) (cid:90)
XA = φp ID + ϑAe dG(i) = φ(E +p ID)+ν r pη (cid:0) e (cid:1)1−η dG(i),
r r r ir ir r r r pNA r ir
r
Assumethatpeoplewithhigherlabourincomesgetproportionatelyhigherlandrentsandalso
spend proportionately more on deforestation. Define the ratio between land rents and labour
income from the aggregates, a , and the ratio of the total income spent on deforestation
r
investments, b .
r
v TA p ID
a ≡ r r , b ≡ r r .
r (cid:82) yLdG(i) r (cid:82) yLdG(i)+v TA
i ir i ir r r
Then the assumption of proportional land rents and deforestation expenditures can be ex-
pressed formally as:
e
(1)yT = a yL, (2)xd = b y =⇒ (3) ir = (1+a )(1−b ) ≡ m
ir r ir ir r ir yL r r r
ir
e = max{wNAzNA,wAzA}m ,
ir r ir r ir r
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
yL
ir
44

where
E
m = r , yL = sAyLA +sNAyLNA = E(yL)
r L yL r r r r r ir
r r
For the second term of the total agricultural expenditure equation, we compute the following
integral
(cid:90)
(e )1−ηdG(i) =(m )1−ηL
E(cid:0)
(yL)1−η
(cid:1)
ir r r ir
(cid:32)
(cid:90) ∞(cid:90) zAwA/wNA
E(cid:0)
(yL)1−η
(cid:1)
=
r r
(wAzA)1−ηf(zA,zNA)dzNAdzA
ir r
0 0
(cid:33)
(cid:90) ∞(cid:90) ∞
+ (wNAzNA)1−ηf(zA,zNA)dzNAdzA
r
0 zAwA/wNA
r r
Thus, the aggregate local share of consumer expenditure in agriculture equals
(cid:16) pA (cid:17)(cid:16) E (cid:17)−η
E(cid:0)
(y )1−η
(cid:1)
ϑA = φ+ν r r ir . (13)
r pN r A p r L r (cid:0)E(y ir ) (cid:1)1−η
6.2 Deforestation parameters estimation
• Recall optimal deforestation level condition
(cid:16)δq (cid:17) δ
TD = (TF)1− ψ δ(Z D )1− 1 δ rt 1−δ
rt rt rt p
rt
• Take logs
1 ψ
log(TD) = log(Z D δδ)+ log(TF)
rt 1−δ rt 1−δ rt
δ δ
+ logq − logp
rt rt
1−δ 1−δ
• Regression specification
δ
log(TD) = α1 +α2 + logv +(cid:15)
rt r t 1−δ rt rt
• Instrument for logv with logv and logv (Anderson-Hsiao)
rt rt−1 rt−2
• Implied δ: 0.28-0.52
45

Table 5: Estimating δ
Outcome: log(Deforestation)
(1) (2) (3) (4)
OLS OLS IV IV
IHS(v ) 0.391∗∗∗ 0.253∗∗∗ 0.817∗∗∗ 1.065∗∗∗
r
[0.025] [0.038] [0.165] [0.283]
Mun. FE Yes Yes Yes Yes
Year FE Yes Yes Yes Yes
Instrument - - First Difference First Difference
Weight None Agri. Area None Agri. Area
R2 0.240 0.346 0.002 -0.001
Observations 89072 89072 77938 77938
Table 6: Estimation of deforestation elasticity
Now let us derive the equation that we use to estimate ψ.
• Steady state condition
TD = ρTA
r,ss r,ss
TF (cid:16)q (cid:17) δ
⇐⇒ r,ss = ρ(Z D )δ− 1 1δδ− δ 1 r,ss δ−1(TF)1− 1− ψ δ
TA r,ss p r
r,ss r,ss
• Take logs
(cid:16)TF (cid:17)
r,ss (cid:0) D 1 δ (cid:1)
log =log ρ(Z )δ−1δδ−1
TA r,ss
r,ss
δ (cid:16)q (cid:17)
r,ss
− log
1−δ p
r,ss
(cid:16) ψ (cid:17)
+ 1− log(TF )
1−δ r,ss
• Regression specification
(cid:16)TF(cid:17) δ (cid:16) ψ (cid:17)
log rt = α − log(v )+ 1− log(TF)+(cid:15)
TA s(r)t 1−δ rt 1−δ rt rt
rt
• Implied δ: 0.26-0.29
• Implied ψ: 0.30-0.32
46

Table 7: Estimating ψ
Outcome: log((Forest Area)/(Agri. Area))
(1) (2) (3)
log(Unprotected Forest Area) 0.668∗∗∗ 0.589∗∗∗ 0.571∗∗∗
[0.004] [0.004] [0.004]
log(v ) -0.419∗∗∗ -0.357∗∗∗
r
[0.005] [0.007]
State X Year FE Yes Yes Yes
Weight Agri. Area Agri. Area Agri. Area
Sample Low deforest.
R2 0.735 0.793 0.805
Observations 28244.000 27875.000 16899.000
6.3 Preference parameters estimation
The parameter governing the non-homotheticity of preferences, η, captures the rate at which
higher-income consumers shift their budget shares away from agricultural goods (i.e. food
items). We estimated by regressing the logarithm of the share of expenditure in food on the
logarithm of total expenditure using the household-level data from the 2017/2018 consumer
expenditure survey (POF). The table below shows the coefficients from that regression. For
robustness, we consider both food expenditure as a share of total non-durables expenditure
(column 1 - our preferred specification) and as a share of total household income (column
2).
Outcome: log-budget share on food items
(1) (2)
Log(Non-durable Expenditure) -0.506∗∗∗
[0.005]
Log(Income) -0.575∗∗∗
[0.008]
Constant 0.914∗∗∗ 0.632∗∗∗
[0.025] [0.056]
R2 0.309 0.195
Dep. Var. Mean -1.730 -3.229
Observations 45322 45322
Note: *p<0.1, **p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
Table 8: Estimates of Engel curves for food consumption
47

Figure 17: Engel curve for food consumption
Slope = -0.506 (0.005)
)gol(
doof
fo
erahs
tegduB
0
1-
2-
3-
Engel curve for food - POF 2017/18
2 4 6 8
Total Household Expenditure (log)
Note: ThisfiguredisplaystheestimatedEngelcurveforfood: therelationshipbetweenincomeandbudghet
shareof food, which illustratesthe non-homotheticityin consumerpreferences. Thedots representthe aver-
age share of total household expenditure dedicated to food items for 20 bins of total househodl expenditure.
6.4 Migration parameters
• Assume the utility of migrant i moving from o to d depends on:
– consumption utiliy V
d
– residential amenities B
d
– an origin-destination migration cost µ
od
– an idiosyncratic preference shock with Frechet distribution and shape parameter
(cid:15)
(cid:0)
V B µo
(cid:1)(cid:15)
Share of Migrantso = d d d
d (cid:80) (cid:0) V B µo (cid:1)(cid:15)
j j j j
• Taking logs it becomes the following equarion with origin and destination fixed effects
log(Share of Migrantso) = δ +δ +(cid:15)log (cid:0) µo (cid:1)
d o d d
• The destination fixed effect, in turn, depends on income at destination and amenities
δ = (cid:15)log(V )+(cid:15)log(B )+u
d d d d
• Next: decompose V into different things so that it depends on income
d
• Column (2) below show results of PPML regression
48

⇒ (cid:15) ≈ 0.633
• Main concern: endogeneity of income. In particular the potential correlation of income
and amenities
• Potential solutions: instruments for income
(1) (2)
Share of Migrants Destination F.E.
log(Distance+1) -1.550∗∗∗
[0.002]
log(Income) 0.633∗∗∗
[0.044]
Origin FE Yes No
Dest. FE Yes No
Pseudo R2 0.805
Observations 3.11e+05 558
Table 9: Estimation of migration parameters
6.5 Trade parameters estimation
Iceberg trade costs are calibrated to fit trade costs in 1999 and 2017 from the residuals in
the regression equation of (log) trade flows with origin and destination fixed effects. Taking
logarithms from equation 6, and sending the volume of expenditure of consumers in region d
to the right hand side so that the data on trade flow rather than shares can be used, yields
logXo = logpo −logp X +(1−σ)log(τo)
d d d d
Notice that this data does not include the observations for which the origin and the des-
tination are the same, as it is data from inter-state customs. Thus, if we assume that
τo = (dist + 1)κ, then the coefficient of the log-log regression of trade flows on distance
d od
(+1) with origin and destination fixed effects equals κ(1 − σ). Given the results from the
regressions reported in the table below, κ ≈ −0.9 ≈ 0.11.
1−9
6.6 Model fit
49

Outcome: log-trade flows
(1) (2)
log(Distance+1) -0.871∗∗∗ -0.916∗∗∗
[0.053] [0.036]
Year 1999 2017
Origin FE Yes Yes
Dest. FE Yes Yes
Pseudo R2 0.966 0.957
Observations 702 702
Note: *p<0.1, **p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
Table 10: Estimation of trade parameters
Figure 18: Model fit: land prices
ledoM
8
6
4
2
0
(log) Average land price
0 2 4 6 8
Data
Figure 19: Model fit: comparing predicted and observed land prices
Note: This compares the predicted land prices from model calibration q with observed land value. Each
r
circle is a micro-region, and the size of the circle corresponds to the total agricultural area
50