Universal Basic Income: Short-Term Results from a
∗
Long-Term Experiment in Kenya
† ‡ §
Abhijit Banerjee Michael Faye Alan Krueger
¶ ‖
Paul Niehaus Tavneet Suri
15 September 2023
Abstract
What would be the consequences of a long-term commitment to provide everyone enough
moneytomeettheirbasicneeds? Weexaminethishotlydebatedissueinthecontextofaunique
field experiment in rural Kenya. Communities receiving UBI experienced substantial economic
expansion—more enterprises, higher revenues, costs, and net revenues—and structural shifts,
with the expansion concentrated in the non-agricultural sector. Labor supply did not change
overall, but shifted out of wage employment and towards self-employment. We also compare
the effects to those of shorter-term transfers delivered either as a stream of small payments
or a large lump sum. The lump sums had similar, if not larger, economic impacts, while the
short-term transfers had noticeably smaller effects, despite having delivered the same amount
of capital to date. These results are consistent with a simple model of forward-looking lumpy
investment, and more generally with a role for savings constraints, credit constraints, and some
degree of (locally) increasing returns, among other factors.
∗We are indebted to Charles Amuku, Suleiman Asman, Shreya Chandra, Pushyami Chilakapati, Gabriella
Fleischman,PrekshaJain,EuniceKioko,TeresaLezcano,BonnyfaceMwangi,AroonNarayanan,SimonRobertson,
MansaSaxena,NikitaSharma,DebborahWambuaandafieldteamofover300peoplefortheirtirelesseffortstohelp
bringthispaperintoexistence. WegratefullyacknowledgefundingfromtheBillandMelindaGatesFoundation,the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, and an anonymous donor. We thank seminar audiences at Berkeley, Harvard,
MIT, and NBER for their feedback. Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals were obtained from MIT and
Maseno University in Kenya. Princeton University, the University of California San Diego and Innovations for
Poverty Action ceded IRBs to MIT. Faye and Niehaus serve without compensation as directors of GiveDirectly.
Suri is the corresponding author: E62-517, 100 Main Street, Cambridge MA 02142. Email: tavneet@mit.edu
†MIT
‡GiveDirectly
§Princeton
¶University of California, San Diego
‖MIT Sloan

1 Introduction
Anydiscussionoftheredesignofthewelfaresystemthesedaysveryquicklyleadstoquestions
about Universal Basic Income (UBI), the idea that every adult who wants it should be
entitled to a minimum weekly or monthly income from the government without having to
do anything to “earn” it. This represents both a philosophical departure from the narrative
typically used to justify safety net programs, i.e. that only those unable for some reason to
support themselves should receive help (Ferguson, 2015) but also a different perspective on
the economic costs and benefits.
The economic case for UBI is partly based on the premise that targeting transfers is costly.
This is partly because the process of being identified for the transfer often imposes both time
costs (e.g. queuing to apply) and psychological costs (e.g. loss of dignity) on the recipients.
These costs also discourage applicants (including some of the most needy) and, combined
with errors in the targeting process, often end up depriving precisely those whom society
most wants to benefit.1
However (obviously), the case also depends on the economic benefits from the transfers.
In particular, even though economists resist the idea that there are better and worse uses
of the money, policy makers are often less comfortable with encouraging beneficiaries to cut
back on work or spend more on, say, alcohol or tobacco, either for paternalistic reasons or
based on behavioral considerations.2 This often leads to a focus on the increase in spending
on desirable forms of consumption (food, schooling etc.) as a measure of benefits to society.3
One could, in principle, be even more demanding. One could ask whether the transfer
raises the incomes of the recipients by at least as much as the amount of the transfer. That
a transfer will lead to increased earnings is by no means obvious—indeed there is a long
tradition in economics of worrying that “easy money” may make people lazy, though there is
nowlotofrecentevidencefromdevelopingcountriespushingbackagainstthisview(Banerjee
et al., 2017). The more recent literature from developing countries suggests, instead, a
number of different reasons why incomes might go up in response to transfers. Some of the
theories are psychological—the security of an assured income might relieve mental pressures
and make the recipients more able to focus on the job. Or it may make them less depressed
and more able to do productive work. Other theories are based on the idea that there
1Hanna and Olken (2018) and Banerjee et al. (2019) discuss these costs in more detail. Hanna and
Olken (2018) provide quantitative estimates of the welfare gains from targeting v.s. universal approaches
in Indonesia and Peru, where they assume that the only cost come from mis-targeting and the physical
machinery of targeting (the psychological costs are not counted.
2Leisure, for example, may be over-valued by the decisive short-run self relative to what the long-run self
might want
3This might partly reflect the elite concern with workers being productive
1

are many unexploited opportunities that result from financial market imperfections. For
example, if investments generate a risky but attractive income stream, many poor people
will avoid making them because they are unable to take on the risk. The guarantee of an
income reduces their risk aversion and therefore encourage them to take on the project. It
could also be that the individual lacks the funds to make an investment that could be quite
lucrative, and is unable to borrow enough.4 Perhaps they can pay for the investment either
by saving up the UBI payments or borrowing against them. If the income gains from the
investment are large enough, the extra earnings could finance further investments and even
make the income gain sustainable, the transfer might even help the household to escape from
a poverty trap. Moreover, UBI might have positive spillovers on income generation if there
is excess capacity in the economy to start with, acting as a demand shock which can lead
to higher earnings for the usual Keynesian reasons. Recent evidence from more narrowly
targeted transfers in Kenya (Egger et al., forthcoming) and Brazil (Gerard et al., 2021) is
consistent with this idea.
The focus on whether UBI leads to an increase in earnings is especially important for
studies from the developing world because these countries often face a rather cruel dilemma.
On one side they lack the data and the capacity to do effective targeting, which argues
for a more or less universal transfer. On the other hand, they face tight fiscal constraints
which makes it very costly to transfer large amounts to a large part of the population. The
promise of a durable impact on earnings from the transfer is particularly important in these
settings because that might partially relieve this tension by allowing some beneficiaries to lift
themselves to the point where they voluntarily give up the transfers (especially if it requires
some effort to , pay taxes into the system, and/or become employers for other beneficiaries).
Perhaps eventually this might even allow for the phasing out of the UBI.
Set against this backdrop, the goal of this paper is two-fold: (a) assess the impact of a
long-term UBI intervention committed to last for 12 years, run by the NGO GiveDirectly
(henceforth GD) in two counties in Kenya, on measures of well-being, labor supply, occu-
pations as well as earnings (with the idea that at least in the first years 12 years feel like
forever) and (b) compare this long-term UBI to two other related but less expensive inter-
ventions also implemented by GD on the same set of outcomes: a short-term version of the
UBI where the payments are exactly the same as in the long-term UBI but stop after 2 years
and a lump sum program where the household gets a single payment equal in present value
to that of the short-term UBI.
The motivation for the first question is obvious. However, the second main plank of this
4deMeletal.(2012)andFafchampsetal.(2014)findevidencethatasinglelumpsumtransfertoowners
of tiny businesses have very high returns, consistent with the idea that they are credit constrained.
2

paper is also very important, both because it helps us identify potential practical alternatives
to UBI, but equally importantly, because it helps us understand the mechanisms that may
be at play with UBI and makes it possible to design better alternatives to it, which do not
have to be the specific ones we consider.
Specifically, the motivation for the lump-sum intervention came from the idea that if
the income gains in UBI could come from financing a lumpy investment that the typical
householdcannotafford,thenthesameoutcomemaybeachievedmoreefficientlyandcheaply
by directly giving the household a one-time lump sum amount that covers the cost of that
investment, so that they don’t have to go through the process of trying to save up the
needed amount out of their small regular transfers.5 Consistent with this idea, households
in an earlier GD program who were given the choice between lump sums and streams of
smaller transfers with the same present value overwhelming chose the former (Kansikas et
al., 2022).
The motivation for the short-term UBI intervention is similar. It is possible that even a
short-term relaxation of economic pressure has positive productivity effects through the var-
ious financial and psychological mechanisms already discussed. If earnings go up as a result,
and that in turn also further relaxes economic pressures, the household may even become
permanently more productive.6 Of course, the same trade off between a more permanent
intervention and more temporary one would arise even if the impact of these short term
interventions on earnings and other welfare outcomes lasted for some time eventually faded
away.
On the other hand, the fact that the full UBI intervention, at least in the early years,
may be perceived as almost permanent, means that its economic and psychological impacts
could be quite different from any of the transitory interventions—for one, it may be much
easier to borrow against such transfers, or to feel less insecure about possible economic
shocks. Moreover, the fact that it lasts for much longer, creates option value—beneficiaries
can afford to wait till they see an opportunity that matches their skills or their preferences
before acting: for some the money may finance migration, while for others it might pay for
a place in a good high school for a child or a machine that they learn about.7 Under the
short-term UBI or the lump sum, it might be too hard to hold onto the funds, and therefore
households may take preemptive action. For all of these reasons, it is important to know
5Of course, the lump sum intervention can only be cheaper by giving households less. Whether or not
that is desirable depends on the fiscal constraints on the government and its social objectives.
6For example, since risk is often highest when the business is being set up, even a short run intervention
that mitigates earnings risk can encourage starting a new business.
7See Adhikari and Gentilini (2018) and Bastagli et al. (2019) for reviews of the evidence on effects of
other cash transfer programs on migration and education, respectively.
3

the time path of the impacts from all three interventions, as well as the relative sizes of the
impacts.
However, setting up a proper UBI experiment to answer these questions is challenging for
a number of reasons. First, the fact that it has to be universal, which we take as given,
means that the program has to cover every adult in the targeted areas, which in our case
are villages in Kenya with, on average, 52 households and 118 eligible adults. Covering
every adult (as opposed to every household) is unusual, and potentially important since a
household transfer may mean some adults need to remain in the same household in order
to continue to benefit. Second, we want to capture the sense of a “permanent” entitlement
which means that there needs to be a credible commitment to continue the program for long
enough, which we decided would be 12 years. Third, we wanted to be powered to be able
to evaluate the impact of the two other variants mentioned above, and ideally to be able to
detect economically meaningful differences in their impacts.
All of this implies that the scale of the experiment in both space and time needed to be
quite large. For one, any valid experiment would need to cover the cost of UBI payments
for a long period of time for a large population. Moreover, the funders need to be patient
enough to accept the fact that the results will take several and, in some cases, many years
to arrive. In addition, the data collection challenge is non-trivial. The program potentially
has impacts on a very wide range of outcomes stretching from business creation, to labor
supply, to consumption patterns, to asset purchases, to mental health. To deal with the
risk of picking and choosing outcomes, we pre-registered 10 sets of (mostly) aggregated
outcomes, but there are obviously many more outcomes of interest. Moreover, the fact that
it is a universal program and covers the entire village, means that there are likely to be
large equilibrium effects from the program: for example, prices may go up and this needs to
be accounted for carefully in assessing the interventions. Wages might go up as well, which
helps some and hurts others. School fees may go up, new schools might open, new businesses
may start, new public investments may be undertaken, there may be crowd in or crowd of
NGOs other than GD. All of those need to be accounted for. Finally, to the extent that
some of our beneficiaries were much more advantaged than others to start with (unlike in a
more targeted intervention), we expect that the impacts to be quite heterogeneous.
These are, no doubt, some of the reasons why this is the first experiment of its kind—
there are other small pilot-style experiments but they offer neither the necessary scale nor
the promise of durability that are essential in answering this set of questions. Appendix A
provides a brief survey of the relevant literature.
At this point we are able to report the results from a set of surveys conducted between
October 2019 and January 2020. At this time, on average, the lump sum, long term and
4

short term arms had received, respectively, 92%, 87% and 92% of the total two year amount.
This coincides with the period just before the end of the 2 year intervention and almost
2 years after the lumpsum was paid out (in 2 tranches)—in other words, at a point when
adults in all three arms had received, on average, approximately the same amount of money
to date, but only those in the long-term arm expected to receive more in the future.
We begin with the results of the long-term UBI treatment (LT). We see that the inter-
vention was implemented as planned and that while there were some (mostly insignificant)
effects on formal and informal taxes and transfers, none of them were big enough to alter
the main story, which is that the amount of total transfers received in the village was about
15% of the total spending in control villages.
Starting with the village level aggregates using data from a census of enterprises we carried
out,wefindthatbothrevenuesandcostsgoupsignificantlyinLT,andthedifferencebetween
them, which we call net revenues (i.e. profits if we do not count the cost of household labor),
go up by slightly more than 50%.
We donot rejectthenullthat consumerprices in nearbymarketswereunchanged, bothfor
agricultural and non-agricultural products, though to be fair these estimates are not precise
enough to rule out meaningful appreciation (or depreciation) given the design and scale of
the experiment.
Almost all of the economic change we see comes from non-agricultural enterprises—net
revenuesfromtheseenterprisesnearlydoubleandthiseffectishighlysignificant. Thisexpan-
sion is associated with the acquisition of substantially more inventories and business assets
and the creation of new enterprises. The number of non-agricultural enterprises goes up by
25% and that effect is significant. Within the non-agricultural sector almost the entire effect
comes from an expansion in the retail sector with positive, but far from significant, effects
on transport and manufacturing. Consistent with this, there is a doubling of the number
of items sold within 2 km of the village, an effect which just fails to be significant (with
a p-value of 0.114). Overall the picture is of an expanding distribution system, potentially
financed in part by the transfers while also meeting the increase in local demand resulting
from them. (The geography of expenditure shifts in parallel, as households spend a larger
share of their budget within their own village.)
There is also an increase in the number of agricultural enterprises and their net revenues—
but it is much smaller in proportional terms and not significant. There is also a 35% increase
in the value of agricultural assets, which is statistically significant. A part of this seems to be
an increase in the price of land (without any change in the actual amount of land owned) but
there are increases in the value of both big and small livestock. The fact that sales are going
up and new enterprises are getting set up suggests that we should observe a corresponding
5

shift in labor supply: there is a significant reduction in hours of wage work, all of which
comes from work in agriculture, and a slightly larger increase in hours of non-agricultural
self-employed work, so there is no net effect on total household labor supply. Overall there is
no evidence of UBI promoting “laziness,” but evidence of substantial effects on occupational
choice.
We also find no effect on equilibrium wage employment, suggesting that wage workers
from outside the village took up the slack. This should imply that wages went up, and
indeed both reported wages in agriculture and construction (the representative sector used
for non-agriculture) as well as reservation wages to work on a public works project increased.
As mentioned already, there is disagreement about the social valuation of the benefits
accruing to individuals and families. We therefore opt to remain agnostic, and report on a
wide range of welfare-related outcomes from a household survey. LT causes a small (5%)
increase in total consumption, almost of it in the form of extra food. It also meaningfully
and significantly raised both protein consumption and food variety at almost all points in
the distribution. The effect on protein consumption is close to a 25% increase at the bottom
of the distribution and closer to 15% near the top of the distribution.
The effect of LT on education spending is positive but not significant, while that on health
spending is negative but also not significant. There is a significant improvement in measures
of well-being and life satisfaction and a substantial reduction in reports of depression, these
last effects significantly smaller for individuals in the LS arm.
Turningtooursecondsetofquestions, whenwecomparetheimpactsofthelumpsum(LS)
arm to the LT, the most striking result is that the two have very similar impacts on village
aggregates. The impacts on revenues, costs and net revenues, as well as the number of en-
terprises is substantially higher under LS, while the impact on assets is somewhat lower, but
none of these differences are significant. On labor supply, like in LT, self-employment substi-
tutes for wage-employment, but the overall effect, while positive, is again indistinguishable
from zero.
The short-term (ST) arm has smaller impacts on all of the aggregates, and in the case
of the number of enterprises, total revenues and total costs the difference with LS is highly
significant and the difference with LT are borderline significant (p values under 0.15). The
impact on net revenue is also at the border of significance in the case of LS (p = 0.14) but
not in the case of LT. In terms of labor supply, the effects with ST are actually very similar
to that of LT, and the net effect is again zero.
When we turn to consumption, it should be noted that for credit and savings constrained
households, higher consumption in the short run does not necessarily mean they are better
off. We find that the effects on consumption (of non-durables) are actually larger in the LS
6

and ST arms than in LT, but the differences though large, are not statistically significant.
Food variety and protein consumption go up in all three arms, and the only significant
difference is that there is more food variety in the ST than in LS. In terms of consumer
durables/household assets, both ST and LS have more positive effects than LT and the
difference between LT and ST is actually significant.
As for wealth overall, productive assets for both agriculture and non-agricultural uses
increase substantially, though the former changes are significant in all arms while the latter
are less precisely estimated. Financial assets increase modestly, with significant increases
in liquid savings and no significant changes in debt. Taken together with the increases in
consumer durables, these imply total accumulation of non-land assets of of between $580 and
$1150 (depending on the arm), relative to the approximately $3000 of UBI transferred. The
value of landholdings, as assessed by respondents, increased even more—in fact the effects
are larger than the amount of money households had received, even after trimming the top
percentile oflandholdings. This is driven entirely by appreciation of existing landholdings, as
opposed to land acquisition, and as we discuss below the interpretation of that appreciation
is subtle—some of it can be explained by investment in structures and other upgrades, but
some of it likely reflects a belief that the same land could command a higher price, possibly
because treated villages had become more desirable places to live.
Both interventions have a positive and significant effect on education spending but we
cannotrejectthatallthreeinterventionshavesimilareffects. Intermsofeducationoutcomes,
the fraction of children getting a score of more than 250 in the KCPE public exam improves
significantly only in LS and the effect is significantly greater than that of LT. While ST has
a negative but not significant effect on health expenditures, LS has a positive and significant
one, and the latter is significantly larger than the effect of LT. In terms of health outcomes,
a child anthropometric index that we pre-specified improves with ST which also has the
biggest effect on food consumption. The other two interventions have no detectable impact
on this outcome, and LT effect is clearly smaller than the ST.
Finally, all the interventions cause significant improvements in mental health, though the
impacts of the LS are (significantly) smaller than the LT and smaller than the ST as well.
This may be the case because the LS households have taken on the risk of their investments
and know they have no further cushion should those investments not work out. It also could
be because both the LT and ST arms have received payments in the last month, unlike the
LS, and there are salience effects and the LT arm knows these payments will continue for an
additional decade.
Taken together these results seem to be consistent with a simple model of a saving and
credit constrained individual who is forward-looking. Some of them have access to a business
7

opportunitywhichrequiresaninitialsunklumpsuminvestmentbutthenoffershighmarginal
returns. This very simple model, developed in the framework section, has the prediction that
at the same initial wealth level ”high-type” LT and LS households are more likely make the
lump-sum sunk investment than the ST households. This is because the LS households can
make the sunk investment sooner and therefore enjoy the high returns longer than the ST
households, while the LT households, have a greater incentive to invest in it even when they
have exactly the same income streams as the ST (the first two years) because they have
longer stream of high incomes to invest in the future. Since each LS and LT have different
reasons to be more pro-investment, the comparison of the two can go either way.
The flip side of this is that those who have no access to the high-return business option or
knowthattheyareunable/unwillingtomakethatinvestment, willhaveaproblemsmoothing
consumption. ForthisreasontheSTsmaybemoreinclinedtoinvestinnon-businessprojects
suchaseducation,agriculture,householdassetsandnutritionaswellasconsumingmorethan
they would like to, compared to the LT and especially the LS.
While we do not claim that this is the unique way to explain our findings, we argue that in
any explanation, savings and credit constraints and some degree of (local) increasing returns
must play a role. And supporting the fact that in our theory that the reason why the LT
behave differently from the ST is that they find it worthwhile to save up for a bigger project,
we see enormously higher ROSCA participation from the LT compared to the LS (who don’t
need to save as much) and ST (who may not want to save).
2 Setting and Research Design
In this section we describe the context, experimental design, and data collection, and report
some basic checks of experimental integrity.
2.1 Context
OurstudyissetinruralKenyainBometandSiayacounties, twoofthepoorercountiesinthe
country. In our baseline survey, for example, 85% of households reported having experienced
hunger at least once in the preceding year, and maize consumption (typically approximately
40% of total consumption) was $0.60 (in PPP terms) per capita per day. Households work
primarily in agriculture—73% had a farm enterprise, and 21% had a non-farm enterprise—
and own 1.7 acres of land on average. 86% had a phone, but only 13% a bank account
(including digital bank accounts).
While quite rural, the villages sampled for our study are also reasonably close to centers
8

of commerce. The average village has 3 markets within 5km (a one-hour walk), and most
are fairly close to the county capital. Figure 2 maps both counties, highlighting both the
study villages and the surrounding markets (which were included in our data collection).
Transfers were implemented by GiveDirectly, a multinational NGO specializing in digital
cashtransfers,typically(inAfrica)viamobilemoney. Kenyahasanextremelywelldeveloped
mobile money systems that are widely used and that therefore makes digital cash transfers
relatively cheap and easy, even to very poor households. As early as 2014 an estimated 96%
of Kenyan households had a mobile money account (Suri and Jack, 2016), the majority of
which were M-PESA accounts on the Safaricom network. All the households in our study
area have easy access to one or more mobile money agents where they can withdraw money
from their accounts.8
2.2 Experimental Design
Tosamplevillagesforthestudy,wefirstselectedtwosub-countiesineachofSiayaandBomet.
In Siaya, we picked two sub-counties where GD had (largely) not worked before. GD has
workedinSiayaformanyyearswithanumberofstudiesexaminingtheirprogrammingthere,
including Haushofer and Shapiro (2016), Egger et al. (forthcoming), Orkin et al. (2022), and
Kansikas et al. (2022). In Bomet (where GD had not previously worked) we choose one
sub-county in which GD had conducted a pilot to test operations in a new county, and a
second on the opposite side of the county capital, Bomet Town (see Figure 2).
Within these four sub-counties we listed (and conducted a census in) all villages, which
amounted to 390 villages. Of these, we restricted ourselves to villages containing between
30 and 100 households in Siaya and between 30 and 73 households in Bomet, for a total of
325 villages. We focused on these relatively small villages to improve power given a fixed
budget for transfers: with treatment assigned at the village level, the cost per treated unit
is proportional to (and hence the size of treated sample is inversely proportional to) the
size of the average treated village. We conducted a census between April and June of 2017
of all 325 villages meeting this criterion, and then randomly selected 295 to be part of our
study. Overall, these sampled villages contained 15,189 households and 73,511 individuals
as of our census, with an average village population of 249 people, of whom 23,082 were
transfer eligible adults.
We randomized these 295 study villages to the following experimental groups:
• Control: 100 villages (approximately 11,000 people) received no transfers.
8As of 2014 the median distance from a study village to the nearest M-PESA agents was 3km, and this
has likely fallen since then as the overall number of mobile money agents has grown substantially.
9

• Long-term UBI: in 44 villages (approximately 5,000 people) each adult over the age of
18 receives US $0.75 nominal per day, or $1.88 PPP, delivered in monthly installments
for 12 years. We calculated this amount as sufficient to cover the most basic needs, such
as basic staple food consumption, and perhaps some health and education. In addition,
teenagers aged 15-17 in long-term villages were told that they would begin receiving
transfers upon turning 18.
• Short-term UBI: in 80 villages (approximately 8,800 people) each adult over the age
of 18 receives transfers as in the long-term arm, but for only 2 years.
• Lump-sum cash transfer: in 71 villages (approximately 8800 people) each adult over
the age of 18 received a one-time payment of about US $500 nominal, or $1250 PPP.
(In practice GD delivered this amount in two equally sized installments two months
apart, in order to fit within M-PESA transaction limits.) The lump-sum transfers was
thus the equivalent in net present value terms of the short-term transfers discounted at
an annual rate of 8%.
Randomization was stratified by location, a geographic unit which (in our data) contains
an average of 14 villages; in this sense the design was optimized for comparisons between
treated and control villages—including spillovers across individuals within those villages—as
opposed to potential spillovers into other villages.9
To the best of our knowledge this experiment is the largest randomized control trial of
UBI to date, both by the number of adults treated and (in the long-term arm) by payment
duration. (Table 1 provides a systematic comparison between the major UBI or basic income
pilots to date on these and other dimensions.) In terms of statistical power, ex ante calcu-
lations based on data from other nearby studies suggested it should be sufficient to detect
plausible effects of each arm on outcomes without a long right tail (such as migration and
time use outcomes), and potentially sufficient to detect effects on outcomes that were more
skewed or exhibited a higher intra-cluster correlation, such as daily per capita consumption.
Appendix C provides more detail on these calculations.
The design was not expected to be powered for two-sided tests of the null of equality
between treatment arms, particularly given that, as of this round of surveys, recipients would
all have received approximately the same amount of money. At the same time, however, the
existing literature on cash transfers (and on the financial lives of household living in or near
extreme poverty more generally) strongly suggests one-sided alternative hypotheses to these
nulls. In particular, one would expect LT to have impacts at least as great as ST, due to
9The design of Egger et al. (forthcoming) is relatively attractive for estimating these spillovers as it
includes all villages in the studied region, and varies treatment intensity at the sub-location level. It also
includes more than twice as many villages (653) as in this sample.
10

opportunities to spend in anticipation of and potentially borrow against future transfers.
Similarly one would expect LS to have impacts at least as great as ST, as it provided money
up front and in a single tranche. (We formalize both of these intuitions in the theoretical
framework below.) Given this, we also report below results from tests of the null of equality
against these one-sided alternatives.
Inadditiontothemaintreatmentswealsocross-randomized(butdonotexaminehere)two
“nudges” within the treatment groups and at the household level. The first was a planning
nudge, encouraging the household to plan what they were going to spend the transfers on
and informing them that GD would ask what these plans were after payments had started.
The second was a savings nudge, reminding them that they had the option to save some of
their transfers in an interest-bearing digital bank account called M-Shwari (see Suri et al.
(2021)formoreonhowM-Shwariworks)andprovidinginstructionsonhowtouseM-Shwari.
We stratified the nudge randomization by village.
Itisimportanttonotethatalltreatmentsareindividual: eachadultistreatedindividually
and separately. If a woman in the long-term arm were to leave her partner, for example, she
would be able to take her remaining transfers with her. In this sense the interventions (and
potential effects on household dynamics) were quite different from those in most other cash
transfer studies, where the unit of treatment is the household, even though many outcomes
will as usual still be measured at the household level. Overall, 23,000 adults were treated
across the 195 treatment villages.
We sampled 30 households in each study village to constitute our study sample, which
we track to measure impacts. We conducted a baseline survey (discussed in more detail
below) of this sample and, after completing each interview, gave every adult in the survey
sample a mobile phone in order to facilitate tracking. Both the baseline survey and phone
distribution were completed before GD enrolled any individual into the various treatments.
GD then separately enrolled adults in treatment villages and implemented all payments.
Payments began between January and June 2018, as different villages had been enrolled
at different times. Individuals who moved into any of the treatment villages after GD’s
enrollment were not eligible for transfers.
2.3 Data Collection Activities
Theanalysisinthispaperdrawsonextensivedataonindividuals,households,firms,markets,
and local government, collected during baseline survey activities in Fall 2017 and follow-up
survey activities in Fall 2019–Spring 2020. Figure 1 illustrates the timing of these activities,
plotting the densities of the dates on which various surveys were conducted as well as the
11

timing of transfer delivery in the different treatment arms for reference.
Baseline activities included in-person surveys of 8,753 household heads to ask about the
household’s activities and outcomes; phone surveys of 4,383 spouses covering sensitive topics
(e.g. domestic violence); in-person surveys of 295 village elders to gather information on
local public goods and labor markets; and surveys of vendors in 105 markets to gather price
data.
Follow-up activities included in-person surveys of 8,292 household heads, as well as 407
heads of households that had migrated together outside of their original village and phone
surveys of an additional 1,034 individuals who had migrated out of their original village;
phone surveys of 6,969 spouses; surveys of 295 village elders; surveys of vendors in 104
markets (where we collected up to 3 price observations each for up to 175 commodities); a
census of 9,850 (non-agricultural) enterprises (including all those located in study villages as
well as in the markets and shopping centers surrounding these villages); and more detailed
surveys of 3,418 enterprises, mapped back to the households that owned them.10
Survey response rates were high: we achieved a 97% household response rates in all arms
in the main endline survey. In addition, because we separately surveyed individual adult
migrants, we are able to add their outcomes back to the totals for the sending household
where appropriate (e.g., when calculating total household income).11
In addition to these primary data-collection activities, we also conducted a short phone
survey in Fall 2022 to gather further detail on a few topics that emerged as important
during analysis of the primary data. Specifically, this survey gathered data on land values,
investments and transactions; on alcohol use; and on participation in rotating savings and
credit associations (ROSCAs).
2.4 Experimental Integrity
Wenextexaminetheintegrityoftheexperimentintermsofbalancewithrespecttotheinitial
randomization, attrition from subsequent surveys, and adherence to treatment assignment.
In general, our sample is balanced. Table D.1 reports measures of balance with respect to
baseline characteristics; we cannot reject the joint null of no mean difference for any outcome
across all treatment arms (F = 0.04,p = 1.00).
10We also subsequently conducted two short follow-up surveys with household heads by phone during the
COVID-19 pandemic, in May/June 2020 and November 2020, focused on a small subset of COVID-related
outcomes. We report results from these separately in Banerjee et al. (2020).
11Specifically, for individual adult migrants living alone (58.2% of adult migrants) we add back the full
values of their income, assets, expenditure, etc. For individual adult migrants who have joined or formed
another household (41.8% of adult migrants), we directly elicited the migrants’ share where possible (e.g.
for assets) and otherwise assign them a proportionate share in the household’s outcome. Our results are not
sensitive to omitting these migrants entirely.
12

Attrition from the household survey was low overall, as implied by the high response rates
of 97% noted above. The response rate was slightly higher in the lump-sum arm than the
control arm (Table D.2), but the composition of attritors was similar across arms, and we
cannotrejectthejointnullofnodifferencesforallarmsandalloutcomes(F = 1.18,p = 0.14;
see Table D.3). There was no attrition from the village elder survey, nor (at the market level)
from the market price survey. The response rate to the enterprise surveys was, on average,
88%, with slightly higher response rates in the ST and LT arms (between 3-4% higher, see
D.2). Attrition rates for the follow-up phone survey were if anything slightly lower, with an
overall response rate of 98% and slightly higher response rates in the LS and ST arm relative
to control.
Adherence to the experimental assignment was high. Table D.4 reports adherence metrics
based on administrative data on transfers issued by GD. We calculate these as of Fall 2019,
when the follow up data collection activities were being conducted, and at a time when
each treatment arm had should have received approximately the same amount of money in
net present values terms. We examine an indicator for whether the household was issued a
transfer during the 40 days prior to the date on which we surveyed it, as well as the total
quantity issued to the household (in net present value terms) as of the date it was surveyed.
For both of these outcomes the control group mean is exactly zero, implying that no
households in control villages were issued any transfers at any point in time. As of the
date households were surveyed in Fall 2019, most of those in the short-term and long-term
arms had received a transfer in the prior 40 days, and (as expected) none of those in the
lump-sum arm had received a transfer in the prior 40 days. The total amounts issued were
almost identical across arms, with the differences (attributable to differences across arms in
the timing of enrollment) very small.
One other aspect of compliance deserves mention. As mentioned above, GD ran a pilot of
the long-term UBI in one Bomet village to test implementation logistics. We unknowingly
included this village in our experimental sample, and (randomly) assigned it to the short-
term arm. We drop this pilot village in the results reported below, but did collect follow-up
data from it, and the results do not change meaningfully if we include it in the short term
treatment arm (yielding intent-to-treat estimates).
3 Framework
This section develops and simulates a model to help us interpret patterns of effects on
investment and consumption that we will see in our data. We are particularly interested in
identifying conditions under which long-term, short-term, and lump-sum transfers lead to
13

different outcomes at the time of our endline surveys, i.e. when the total amounts transferred
are similar in each case. The model we examine here is of course not the only one that could
generate such differences, but it is illustrative of the kinds of constraints needed, and it
makes the point that even a fairly simple model is capable of generating rich patterns akin
to those we will see.
Households maximize their lifetime discounted utility:
T
(cid:88)
δtu(c ) (1)
t
t=0
where
1−c1−σ
u = (2)
1−σ
Each household begins with an initial wealth of w . Households receive exogenous income
0
as follow: those in the LT condition receive income y till period T; those in the ST condition
receive income y for S periods and then y < y thereafter; and those in the LS condition
receive a lump sum transfer at time 0 that is equivalent to the net present value of the ST
transfer, and then y in each period thereafter.
In addition to this exogenous income, households can also earn endogenous income from
investments they make. All households have access to the same constant-returns savings
technology which yields a real rate of return r < 1. This captures the idea that saving is
difficult in our setting because households do not have access to safe, inflation-protected
saving vehicles. In addition, some households (type H) have access to a opportunity which
yields a higher return of R >> r on incremental capital if they have previously made a
one-time sunk investment of I > w + y. This captures opportunities such as starting a
0
small business that require a lumpy up-front investment to begin, but subsequently yield a
higher return on capital than alternatives. The other type L households do not have access
to this opportunity.
Together these assumptions imply the dynamic budget constraint
w = R (w −c +y ) (3)
t+1 t t t t
where R = R if they have made the sunk investment prior to t and R = r otherwise. We
t t
assume that there is no credit, so that w ≥ 0.
t
14

3.1 Analysis and Results
This very simple model has the following comparative statics implications that we first list
and then verbally explain, with a more formal argument in Appendix B.
1. Endowments & preferences: Regardless of treatment condition, type H households
are more likely to invest at some point if they start with a higher w and if they have
0
a higher δ.
2. LT vs ST: Type H households are more likely to invest under LT than under ST, given
the same δ and w , and might save more before period S. Type L households, on the
0
other hand, should save less before period S under LT than under ST.
3. LT vs LS: Type H households may save more or less in early periods under LT than
under LS, given the same δ and w . Type L households, on the other hand, save less
0
before period S under LT than under ST.
The intuition for these results come mostly from thinking about the incentive to save.
There are two reasons to save. One, shared by both types, is to smooth consumption. This
is strongest for the LS and then the ST who have temporarily elevated income; the LT
have constant flows for the foreseeable future and can therefore consume relatively smoothly
by consuming their current income (unless they start with a lot of wealth). Consumption
smoothing is why L type STs and LSs have a much stronger incentive to save than L type
LTs.
The second reason to save applies only to the H types, who have the option of earning a
much higher return on their savings if they make the sunk investment of I. This is relatively
easy for the LS, at least if the lump sum they get is large enough, but for LT and ST it is not
so easy as they need to save up to get to I, and until they have done so the rate of return
on their savings is negative. Because of this they need to save fast. But saving fast requires
a steep sacrifice in terms of consumption smoothing—it involves consuming little now to get
to high levels of consumption in the future. This is why the discount factor matters, and
why it is easier for richer households (who need to save less) to invest.
The value of access to the high returns investment technology is more valuable if the
householdplanstohavelargeamountsofsavings. TheproblemfortheHtypeSThouseholds
is that by the time they have saved up and invested in the sunk technology, their extra
income may be about to run out and therefore their ability to save is also about to go down.
Therefore they are less likely to want to invest than the corresponding LT households who
will have larger income flows into the future and therefore savings to invest in the high return
technology. On the other hand, for the same reason, the ST households that do invest might
save more than the LT households that do invest because they need to get to make the sunk
15

investment faster to benefit from it. Finally the LS households that do invest have both a
good savings technology and a strong reason to smooth consumption, which is a reason for
them to save more than the LT. On the other hand they have a higher income in the early
period so the savings rate could be higher or lower.
Figures 3–5 illustrate the model dynamics for H types via simulation. We set the param-
eters that we observe in the design of the experiment or in our data to their actual values:
initial wealth at w = $1432 (mean wealth in the control group), non-transfer income at
0
y = $210 (mean monthly income in the control group), monthly income including transfer
income at y = $341 (y plus the mean monthly transfer), and the value of the lump sum
equal to the net present value (discounted at an annualized rate of 0.08) of all transfers in
the short-term arm, i.e. $3000 per household. We then set the remaining unobserved prefer-
ence and production parameters as follows: δ = 0.999 (corresponding to an annual discount
factor of 0.988), σ = 0.6; time horizons at T = 72 months, the duration of the short-term
transfers at S = 12, and rates of return at r = 0.9 and R = 1.2. The figures show the time
paths of consumption and wealth for all three treatment groups and the time at which an
investment is made (if at all). Note that the wealth variable measures liquid wealth and does
not include the sunk investment (I), so that wealth goes down when the household sinks the
investment cost.
We vary the remaining parameter, the lumpy investment cost I, to illustrate the conse-
quences this has. In Figure 3 we set I = $2900, at which point the investment is expensive
but still feasible for LS recipients to make immediately upon receiving their transfers. We
see that in this scenario the H-type LS recipients do indeed invest, and that LT recipients do
so as well, though it takes the latter group longer to accumulate enough liquid wealth do so.
H-type ST recipients, on the other hand, do not invest. Because of this their consumption
is higher than that of the LT’s during the early periods of the model—matching what we
observe in the data—but lower in the later in the periods. Meanwhile the fact that the LS
can save at a high return from the beginning gives them a marked advantage in terms of
long-term consumption.
In Figure 4 we lower the cost of the investment to I = $1450, and here in contrast all
groups invest (and do so immediately, in period 1). This illustrates the role of lumpiness
in the model: the minimum scale of the capital investment required must be large enough
relative to the size of the transfers to make saving up to cover it attractive for the LT group
butnotfortheSTgroup. Thecorollarytothispointisthatsufficientlylargetransferstreams
would also enable all groups to invest; we illustrate this in Figure 5, where we revert to the
larger value I = $2900 but counterfactually set the transfers to be double their actual size.
Here once again the H-types in all the groups invest, though the ST and LT groups take a
16

bit longer to accumulate the capital required to do so.
Comparing these scenarios, we see that H types may choose to invest under all three
treatments, but only if resources are plentiful enough. If not, those in ST will choose not to
invest for the reasons discussed above. These reasons are of course not the only ones that
could lead to greater investment and earning in the LT than the ST arm. To the extent
that households in the LT arm can borrow against their future transfers (something we will
explore in the results below), it will be easier for them to invest in the early periods. LT
households might be more willing to take on risk, knowing that they are assured of a bare
minimum income in the future. And LT households should anticipate that their neighbors
will have more to spend in the future, which might make sinking an investing today—in
a small retail business, for example—more attractive. The point here is that substantial
differences can emerge even absent these forces.
4 Empirical Methods and Results
4.1 Empirical Specification
In this section we report on the main results from our empirical analysis of the program
impacts. We focus on the pre-registered outcomes and specifications, but supplement it as
needed to build up our overall narrative. Our basic specification is:
Y = α+β LT +β ST +β LS +γX +ψ +(cid:15)
i LT v(i) ST v(i) LS v(i) i s(i) i
where i indexes households, firms, elders; v(i) indexes villages; s(i) indexes strata. The
controls, X , include the baseline value, if available, of the outcome or a close analogue if
i
the exact outcome was not collected in the baseline. The controls also include an indicator
for any part of the data collected by phone.
For household outcomes, we interact the three treatment indicators with the number of
baseline adults and report the derived average treatment effect (Athey and Imbens, 2017).
We expect that the treatment effects may be differential by the number of treatment-eligible
adults in a household, so model this explicitly. In practice, this has little effect on the results.
Where we have the data and where relevant, we add adult migrant outcomes back in to the
household totals. We report all monetary outcomes in $ PPP, and often annualize the flow
values, unless otherwise noted.
We adjust the standard errors for spatial auto-correlation (Conley, 1999, 2010). We also
reporttestsofeachcross-armequalityrestrictionwiththepowercaveatsfromearlier. Wealso
test the null of no cross-village spillovers and, for most outcomes, we do not reject this null.
17

This is not surprising from a power perspective. Compared to Egger et al. (forthcoming), we
are half as dense, with about half as many villages and no super-village intensity variation.
For outcomes with long right tails, we show some additional specifications that account
for these, including (conditional) quantile regressions. We report all monetary outcomes in $
PPP, the flow values are annualized unless otherwise noted. We pre-specified some outcomes
(andhowtheyarecalculated)inapre-analysisplan(https://www.socialscienceregistry.
org/trials/1952). Those pre-specified outcomes are mostly aggregates to represent a fam-
ily of outcomes or an aggregate outcome (like income or consumption).
4.2 Results
Table 1 describes the implementation of the interventions, drawing on administrative pay-
ment records which we match back to our sample. The total amounts issued in the last
two years (Column 2) are very similar for the three interventions, as they should be, since
the expected value of disbursements over the first two years was meant to be the same.
No households in LS had been issued a payment within the last 40 days as of either Fall
2019 or Summer 2020, while 90% of LT and ST households had.12 The total amounts of
money issued to an average treatment village are stated in Column 3; in the LT and ST
arms these amount to 11% of total household expenditure in the average control village in
the corresponding period, and in the LS arm to 12%.
Of course these are the gross transfers. We need to check whether they are partly crowding
out other transfers or whether either the family or the local political system imposes addi-
tional taxes on them ((Jakiela and Ozier, 2015), (Squires, n.d.)). Table E.3 in the appendix
shows that there is no significant effect on taxes paid to or transfers received from govern-
ment, and the confidence intervals let us rule out effects that are substantial relevant to the
size of the transfers. Remittance sent go up significantly in LS, and though the impacts in
LT and ST are smaller and not significant, they are not too dissimilar in magnitude.13 Again
however the amounts are not large–of the order of 1-2% of the amount received from GD
12There are three reasons this is not 100%. The first is that not everyone we identified as living in a
treatment villages was subsequently enrolled by GD, primarily because GD sometimes adopted a different
definition of village boundaries than that used by our survey team. The second is that the match rate
between our data and GD’s data need not be 100% even among people that GD did, in fact, pay. The
consequence of these two factors is that we can identify 92% of our sample in GD’s data. The third is that
not everyone GD identified had been paid due to deaths, administrative delays, etc., but this is a very small
group: conditional on a match to GD’s data, 99%, 99%, and 98% of the households in the LS, ST, and LT
arms, respectively had received some payment. The bottom line is simply that the ITT estimates we report
are likely to be slightly smaller than the full treatment-on-treated effects.
13However the fact that the effect is largest in LS may not be an accident. As we suggest, some people in
LS have the biggest need for consumption smoothing, and a gift to a relative or friend now may be seen as
a way to acquire a future claim.
18

over the last year. We also see that there is a negative effect on the presence of any NGO
other than GD, significant in both ST and LS, though these NGOs do not seem have been
major source of transfers.
Table2reportsonthevillagelevelaggregates. Weseethatthenumberofenterprises, their
costs, revenues and net revenues (i.e. profits without deducting the price of household labor)
go up with LT and even more with LS (the difference though quite large is never significant).
ST has smaller but still positive, effects on each of these outcomes which are only significant
for net revenue, and the difference with LS is significant in most cases. Table 3 tells us
that much of the overall effect comes from from enterprises in the non-agricultural sector
despite the fact that both LS and ST have positive and significant effects on agricultural
costs and revenues (but not on net revenue). The effect of LT on agricultural outcomes is
smaller and not significant. Consistent with this, there is some evidence of modest increases
in agricultural input usage (e.g. 5-7 percentage point increases in the extensive margin of
fertilizer use in all arms, and a ∼ 10% increase in labor input to livestock and farms in the
ST arm — see Table E.7). Within the non-agricultural sector, the effect on retail is both
the largest and the only one that is systematically significant (Table E.9).
Regarding consumer prices the data have less to say. We conducted one round of detailed
price measurement in all relevant markets, but the variation induced by our design in the
share (or count) of villages near these markets that were treated is necessary much less than
the variation in village treatment status, which we can use to estimate effects on outcomes
measured in villages. Overall we do not reject the null that consumer prices were unaffected,
in which case the revenue increases discussed above come entirely from increased sales,
albeit with fairly wide confidence intervals (Table E.1). One should also keep in mind that
Egger et al. (forthcoming) studying lump-sum transfers in the same region (and with more
spatialvariation)preciselyestimateconsumergoodsinflationat0.1%inresponsetotransfers
amounting to 15% of GDP.
Turning to household level outcomes, Table 4 shows that the treated households are not
working less. The point estimates are positive, but not significantly so. The corresponding
impacts on total household income are also positive and significant for LS and ST. The effect
of LS is large–50% of the control group income–and significantly greater that of LT. When
we split this up by wage employment and self-employment, in LT we see the expected shift
towards self-employment, and we see the same in ST and LS, though the reduction in wage
employment is not significant.
The reduction in labor supply, combined with a growth in the number of enterprises,
means that we would expect wages to go up, and generally speaking this is indeed what
we see (Table E.4). We report two measures of wages: typical hourly wages paid to labor
19

hired from outside study villages for agricultural or construction work, as reported by village
elders, and the reservation wage the respondent reported they would require to accept work
on a public works project during the main or off-season. We observe the former measures
only in villages where the elder reports that hiring-in is common enough for there to be a
prevailing wage, around 60%ofvillages, butthisrateisnotsignificantlydifferentacrossarms
(Columns 3 and 4). These measures goes up in all arms and significantly so in most cases
(the exception being the agricultural wage in the LS arm). We observe the latter measures,
on the other hand, for all households. Again we see positive estimated effects, significant in
some cases, but the point estimates are much smaller (Columns 5 & 6). This suggests that
the increase in realized wages in Columns 1 & 2 may reflect in part a shift in the supply of
local labor, but is predominantly due to higher labor demand.
One factor that may have moderated wage effects is an in-migration response, shown in
Appendix Table E.6. There is a small but significant increase in the number of new arrivals
in existing households of about the same size in LT, ST and LS (Column 2), and a much
larger increase in the number of households in both LT and LS (significant in LS) but no
correspondingeffectinST.Thisin-migrationlikelyalsocontributedtotheincreasesinoverall
levels of economic activity documented above.14
Table 5 reports on consumption outcomes. All the interventions have positive effects on
total consumption, though the LT effect is smaller than the other two and the only that is
not significant. The effect is moderate sized, between 6-11% of the control median and 19%-
33% of the average amount transferred by GD. The effect on food consumption is positive,
similar-sized and significant in all three cases, and in all cases there is an similar significant
improvementinproteinconsumptionandinfoodvarietyasmeasuredbythenumberofgoods
consumed, though the effect of LS on food variety is a bit smaller. Education spending goes
up in all 3 arms, though only the somewhat larger ST and LS effects are actually significant.
Health spending actually goes down, except in LS, but none of the effects are significant.
Spending on “temptation goods” in particular is a sensitive issue in this context, where
alcoholism in particular is a well-documented problem (see for example Lo et al., 2013). Sur-
vey reports of alcohol consumption may understate the truth if the respondent under-reports
their own consumption or is not fully aware of other household members’ consumption.15
14On thie note, it is striking that the in-migration responses are very different between ST on the one
hand and LS and LT on the other. The increase in new households is significantly larger in LS than in
ST, and LT-ST difference though not significant (p=0.19) is large. One might speculate that these reflect
the expectations of the future of these villages. The LS villages saw the biggest growth in enterprises and
perhapstheexpectationwasthattherewillbeadurablestructuraltransformationinthese. TheLTvillages
do not yet see as large a change, but the intervention and hence the increased level of demand is expected
to last for many years. In ST the current impact is smaller and its expected to end relatively soon.
15ThoughSchilbach(2019)obtainssimilarresultswhenusingeitherself-reporteddrinkingorbreathalyzer
20

We asked respondents in our Fall 2022 phone survey both about their own consumption and
also about drinking they observed in their village. Table E.10 reports the results. While esti-
mated effects on self-reported measures are approximately zero (and rule out large changes),
effects on measures of drinking by others are significantly negative: respondents reported
seeing fewer of their neighbors drinking daily, and were less likely to perceive drinking as a
problem.
Table 6 reports on physical asset ownership. The first salient pattern is that self-reported
value of agricultural real estate increases substantially and significantly in all three interven-
tion groups (Column 1), but this does not appear to be primarily because they are acquiring
more land from others (Column 6). Instead they ascribe greater marketable value to the
same land. In part this likely reflects investments that they have made in structures that do
enhance the value of the land—the value of existing structures goes up, significantly so in
LS (Column 8), as does the value of recent investments in these structures, significantly so
in LT and ST (Column 9). But these investments cannot come close to accounting for the
very large appreciation in overall land value. As market transactions are rare in this setting
we cannot compare these self-assessed values to market prices, and they may of course be
mis-assessed to some extent. But the in-migration we response we noted earlier also suggests
that these communities may indeed have become more desirable places to live.
Turning to non-real-estate assets, agricultural assets go up significantly in all three inter-
ventions (Column 3). While the impacts on non-agricultural business assets are similarly
large, they are too noisy to be significant (Column 4). Non-real estate household assets
(gadgets etc.) go up significantly with ST and LS but not with LT and the difference be-
tween ST and LT is significant (Column 5). In terms of financial assets (Table 7), the effect
on both household and enterprise savings are positive and mostly significant and of similar
magnitudes. The amount the households have in ROSCAs also goes up significantly with
all three, but the effect of LT is significantly larger than that of the other two. LT has a
negative effect on net household borrowing and essentially no effect on enterprise borrowing.
ST has small positive effects on both types of borrowing but nothing is significant, and the
same is of LS, except that it is effect on enterprise borrowing is actually large but very noisy.
The difference in household borrowing between LT and LS households is significant–there is
more borrowing in LS.
Table 8 reports on what happens to inequality within the village, which is both interesting
in itself and as an input into people’s well-being. There are no significant changes in either
the 75-25 ratio or the Gini coefficient for either wealth or income from any of the interven-
tions. On the other hand, the 75-25 ratio for non-land wealth goes down substantially and
test results.
21

significantly in all three, and LS effect is significantly bigger than the LT effect. For con-
sumption the 75-25 ratio goes down significantly in ST, while the other interventions have
no significant effects on either measure of inequality.
A distinct but related question is whether the interventions affected economic mobility,
construed here to mean lack of dependence of eventual standards of living on initial ones. It
is of course relatively early in the course of a 12-year experiment to examine this question,
but still of interest given the large economic changes that had already taken place. We
can reject large effects, however, on the correlation between baseline and endline assets or
consumption per capita (Table 8, Columns 9 & 10). Mobility in this sense had not changed
substantially.
Table 9 reports on a range of household welfare outcomes that are not directly measured
by purchases or spending. In Table 5 we saw that education spending goes up in LS and
ST. We now ask if this shows up in educational outcomes. We do not see any effect on
years of schooling, but the likelihood of getting more than 250 in the KCPE exam goes up
significantly substantially (14%) in LS, which is also the one with the biggest point effect on
educational spending. Likewise the biggest effect in food expenditures is in ST and it is also
the one with the biggest and the only significant positive effect on our anthropometric index.
The index is defined and its individual components are described in Table E.2. The rest of
the columns report on mental health outcomes. We see that all three treatments significantly
reduced standard measures of depression though the LS effect is about half the size of the
LT effect, and the difference is significant. The results on locus of control are more puzzling.
The LT treatment has the most negative effect–it seems to disempower the households even
as it makes them happier. The other two treatments also have negative effects but they are
smallerandnotsignificant. Intermsofsatisfactionwithlifeoutcomes,somewhatsurprisingly
ST is the one with the clearest positive effects, with LS always the least positive (and none of
its effects are significant). Domestic violence seems to be most clearly reduced in LS, in the
sense that the effect is the largest and the only one to be significant, but the point estimates
are similar-sized and negative in all three. Finally, all three treatments have almost identical
(positive, significant) effects on self-reported happiness as measured using Cantril’s ladder,
indicating that they were currently roughly 1 of one step closer to their best possible life on
5
a 0-10 step scale (Cantril, 1965).
4.3 Discussion of Results
The results mostly tell a story consistent with households that are both savings and credit
constrained. ThefactthattheinvestmentpatternsaresignificantlydifferentbetweenSTand
22

LS despite the wealth transfer being the same in present value–which rules out a pure wealth
effect on investment choices, acting say through a change in demand or in risk preferences–is
evidence of a credit constraint. This is reinforced by the fact that the LT households, despite
getting a much bigger wealth transfer in present value terms, choose to invest less than the
SThouseholdsonagricultureandtheLShouseholdsonbothagricultureandnon-agricultural
businesses, though the differences are never quite significant.
While we have no direct evidence for credit constraints (or for that matter for savings
constraints), it is striking that in Table 6, we see that total borrowing of a household in the
control group is less than a month’s consumption in the control group, as shown in Table
5. The amount borrowed for example is very low compared to say the subjects in Banerjee
et al. (2015b) for whom loans outstanding is about ten times average monthly household
consumption. We cannot say whether this is supply or demand, but credit seems not to be
a major part of how households optimize over time in this setting.
Of course for the credit constraint to matter at the extensive margin (we see many fewer
enterprises being created in ST compared to LS), there must be some non-convexity. Oth-
erwise, there would be the same number of enterprises created in ST (and LT), just smaller.
When we look at the data on household purchases of “lumpy” assets (defined as an asset
worth KShs 5000 or more), we see larger effects on the total value purchased of these lumpy
assets in the ST and LS arms, and reject the joint null that the effect was the same in all
arms, even though effects on the frequency of large purchases was similar across arms (Table
E.5).
Some of the strongest evidence for credit frictions comes from participation in rotating
savings and credit associations (ROSCAs). People often mention these to us during our
field visits after transfer had begun, especially as a means of turning streams of smaller
payments into larger lumps of capital. Consistent with this, the follow-up phone survey
indicatessubstantial increases in ROSCA participationin the LT arm, with annualpayments
higher by 19.8% of the average annual transfer value and by 300% of the control median
(unconditional on making any payment). Note that the reference period for this outcome
was the trailing three years, and thus includes the period after transfer began but before
our first endline survey. This means that the (differential) effects we see here are consistent
with the possibility that ROSCA participation increased differentially in the LT during that
period, which would help explain the larger effects of LT on other outcomes—though we
cannot be certain of this.
We also do not observe all the households in LS villages starting an enterprise and some
households in ST do start one, which probably reflects some natural heterogeneity either in
productivity or in access to capital. On the other hand, it is possible that some households
23

would like to start a business enterprise, but only when they are able to invest at a certain
scale,andthereforewouldliketosaveup. ThismaybeparticularlythecaseinLThouseholds,
who can foresee a long time horizon over which they will have resources that they can save.
Since many of the households are unable or unwilling to invest in a business enterprise,
but a significant fraction would like to save, either for consumption smoothing or for even-
tually starting their enterprise, this where the savings constraint comes in to play. However,
financial savings are not a big part of the household portfolios in the control group–the total
mean household and enterprise savings is just over half of one month’s consumption (Table
7, Columns 3 & 4). Most forms of savings go up with the interventions, but after two years
the total increment is only about another 50% of the control group savings. We also do not
see significant changes in outstanding debt (Columns 1 & 2). Given that the ST households
are about to face the end of the GD inflows and for the LS households this has already
happened this is strikingly little, and suggests that saving is more likely taking place in the
form of physical assets.
One asset, in particular, that the households could potentially use for savings is land. The
average household in control owns land valued at about twice the mean of household annual
consumption spending. The value of land owned goes up by about 15-20% as a result of the
intervention. This seems to be mostly the effect of revaluation without much improvement
in its quality but with some improvement in amenities (refer to Appendix Table E.8). This
is consistent with an increased demand for a store of value, which ends up raising the price,
since the supply is inelastic. Given that there were was little reallocation of land (in our
phone survey, in the year prior only 1.7% and 2% of households respectively sold and bought
land), this means that most households have not found a location for their extra savings
(though it is true that they have more wealth in terms of land, which means they need
savings less).
Consistent with that, we see that the households are also acquiring non-enterprise related
household assets. They are also repairing their homes. However we do not see big differences
across the three treatments. In particular we might have expected the ST households to be
under more pressure to acquire assets than the LT households, since their money runs out
much sooner and most of them are unwilling or unable to make large business investments.16
Where we do see those expected difference is in nutrition and education and in protein
consumption, where the ST households spend more than the LT, though the difference is
never significant. We do, however, find significant differences in the outcome of nutrition
16InthecaseoftheLShouseholds,therearetwocountervailingforces. Ononesidetheyhavemoremoney
atonceandthereforeagreatercompulsiontosmoothconsumption,butontheothersidemoreofthemstart
business enterprises and/or invest in exiting business enterprises.
24

- the ST households do significantly and substantially better in terms of anthropometric
outcomes for children.
Finally turning to the mental health results, the fact that LS has the least positive effects
on depression despite being the group that has the largest increment in earnings, may be
consistent with the fact that getting a large one-time payment is stressful (“what happens
if we waste the money”). Though the ST-LT difference on depression is not significant, it
also goes in the right direction, in the sense that LT households have the least reason to
be stressed. On the other hand, the fact that the impact on happiness is similar across the
treatments, and the impact on satisfaction with living standards is higher in ST than in LT
(though the difference is not significant) is a bit puzzling. Finally the fact that domestic
violence actually goes down more in LS than in the other two is striking. Perhaps the fact
that these households need to combine the assets of domestic partners in deciding on the
right investments plays a role here?
5 Conclusion
This paper has described what we have learned two years in to a unique experiment designed
to examine the effects of Universal Basic Incomes—here, a commitment to giving everyone
in rural communities in Kenya income transfers sufficient to meet basic needs for over a
decade. The design also lets us compare these effects to those of two shorter-term transfer
programs which delivered similar amounts of money during the period we studied—as small
monthly payments or in a single lump sum—but without the promise of ongoing funding.
Communitiesthatreceivedlong-termtransferssawsubstantialeconomicexpansions. Over-
all enterprise counts, revenues, costs, and net revenues increased by 14%, 41%, 35%, and
52%, respectively—substantial changes relative to the quantity of money transferred in,
which amounted to 11% of control mean expenditure. This reflected structural shifts, with
the expansion disproportionately concentrated in the non-agricultural sector, particularly in
retail—indeed much of the economic story appears to have been the expansion of supply
chains to meet increased local demand for goods manufactured elsewhere.
Labor supply did not fall—we estimate a small, insignificant increase, and can reject large
decreases—butalsodidnotrisebyenoughtoaccountformuchofthisexpansion. Insteadthe
main pattern was one of changing occupational choices, with workers switching out of wage
employment and into self-employment (and wages rises in response). Household well-being
improved on some common measures (e.g. food consumption, depression) but not others
(e.g. children’s anthropometrics and schooling).
Relative to these effects, those of the shorter-term transfers were striking. Communities
25

that received lump sum transfers experienced economic expansions similar to and on some
measures even larger than those that received long-term transfers, as well as significant pop-
ulation growth (13% more households). Yet communities that received the same amount
of money structured as short-term monthly payments saw very different effects: aggregate
output grew significantly less, while by some measures (e.g. consumption) short-run house-
hold well-being increased more. Collectively this pattern of effects implies that both the
way in which a given quantum of transfers is structured and the promised future duration
of transfers can have large consequences for behavior and outcomes today. It is consis-
tent, for example, with a model in which borrowing and saving are difficult and investment
projects require both a large up-front capital outlay and ongoing flow investment to turn a
profit—though this is hardly an exclusive explanation.
The pattern of effects on mental health—specifically, depression—are also noteworthy.
Depression scores fell in all arms, but more so in short-term and especially the long-term
arm than in the lump sum arm, even though the lump-sum arm saw the largest economic
response. Perhapsthelumpsumrecipientsfeeltheweightofthefuturemoreheavily,knowing
that they have made their bets and have no further cushion to anticipate if those do not pan
out.
Time (and subsequent round of data collection) will shed some light on this point, letting
us examine how these interventions are affecting the volatility as well as the average levels
of living standards. It will also reveal whether more generally the trajectories of households
in the long-term communities diverge from those in the others as they continue to receive
transfers. The long horizon of their transfers may allow them to bide their time, waiting for
the right opportunities to arrive. Or it may prove that the initial wealth transfer in the lump
sum arm was sufficient to kickstart those communities onto permanently better trajectories
at much lower cost than the long-term approach.
In the meantime we conclude with three remarks relevant to the broader dialogue about
UBI. First, UBI here did not lead to the adverse effects that some of its critics have argued it
would. Most notably, people did not work or earn less on their own. This is in line with and
extends the partial-equilibrium evidence from other shorter-term and more finely-targeted
transfer programs in low- and middle-income countries (Banerjee et al., 2017). Second, while
there is much to learn from the many short-term pilots now underway around the world,
one should be cautious extrapolating from these to forecast the consequences of longer-
term policies. Households here made their plans with the future in mind, and those in the
long-term arm experienced very different outcomes—whether because they could borrow
against or plan to spend their own future transfers, or plan to win future business from
their neighbors. And third, tranching matters. Discussions about UBI usually begin from
26

a narrative of meeting basic needs. But even the most destitute households often look for
ways to accumulate sums of money large enough to make larger, lumpier purchases (Collins
et al., 2009). Designing UBI schemes in ways that respond to this need could make them a
more compelling strategy for addressing extreme poverty over time.
27

References
Adhikari, Samik and Ugo Gentilini, “Should I Stay or Should I Go: Do Cash Transfers
Affect Migration?,” Policy Research Working Paper 8525, World Bank 2018.
Athey, S. and G.W. Imbens, “Chapter 3 - The Econometrics of Randomized Experi-
mentsa,” in Abhijit Vinayak Banerjee and Esther Duflo, eds., Handbook of Field Experi-
ments, Vol. 1 of Handbook of Economic Field Experiments, North-Holland, 2017, pp. 73–
140.
Baird, Sarah, Joan Hamory Hicks, Michael Kremer, and Edward Miguel, “Worms
at Work: Long-run Impacts of a Child Health Investment*,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 07 2016, 131 (4), 1637–1680.
Balboni, Clare, Oriana Bandiera, Robin Burgess, Maitreesh Ghatak, and Anton
Heil, “Why Do People Stay Poor?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 12 2021, 137
(2), 785–844.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Nathanael Goldberg, Dean Karlan, Robert Osei,
William Pariente, Jeremy Shapiro, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry,
“A multifaceted program causes lasting progress for the very poor: Evidence from six
countries,” Science, 2015, 348 (6236), 1260799.
, , Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia Kinnan, “The Miracle of Microfinance? Evi-
dence from a Randomized Evaluation,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
2015, 7 (1), 22–53.
, Michael Faye, Alan Krueger, Paul Niehaus, and Tavneet Suri, “Effects of a
Universal Basic Income during the pandemic,” Innovations for Poverty Action Working
Paper, 2020.
, Paul Niehaus, and Tavneet Suri, “Universal Basic Income in the Developing World,”
Annual Review of Economics, 2019, 11 (1), 959–983.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., Rema Hanna, Gabriel E. Kreindler, and Benjamin A.
Olken, “Debunking the Stereotype of the Lazy Welfare Recipient: Evidence from Cash
Transfer Programs,” The World Bank Research Observer, 08 2017, 32 (2), 155–184.
Bastagli, Francesca, Jessica Hagen-Zanker, Luke Harman, Valentina Barca,
Georgina Sturge, and Tanja Schmidt, “The Impact of Cash Transfers: A Review
of the Evidence from Low- and Middle-income Countries,” Journal of Social Policy, 2019,
48 (3), 569–594.
Blattman, Christopher, Nathan Fiala, and Sebastian Martinez,“GeneratingSkilled
Self-Employment in Developing Countries: Experimental Evidence from Uganda *,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 12 2013, 129 (2), 697–752.
28

Cantril, Hadley, The Pattern of Human Concerns, New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers
University Press, 1965.
Coady, David, “The application of cost-benefit analysis to the evaluation of PROGRESA,”
Technical Report January 2000.
Collins, D., J. Morduch, S. Rutherford, and O. Ruthven, Portfolios of the Poor:
How the World’s Poor Live on $2 a Day, Princeton University Press, 2009.
Conley, Timothy G., “GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence,” Journal of
Econometrics, 1999, 92 (1), 1 – 45.
, “Spatial Econometrics,” in Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume, eds., Microecono-
metrics, London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2010, pp. 303–313.
de Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff, “One-Time Transfers
of Cash or Capital Have Long-Lasting Effects on Microenterprises in Sri Lanka,” Science,
2012, 335 (6071), 962–966.
Egger, Dennis, Johannes Haushofer, Edward Miguel, Paul Niehaus, and
Michael W Walker, “General Equilibrium Effects of Cash Transfers: Experimental
Evidence from Kenya,” Econometrica, forthcoming.
Fafchamps, Marcel, David McKenzie, Simon Quinn, and Christopher Woodruff,
“Microenterprise growth and the flypaper effect: Evidence from a randomized experiment
in Ghana,” Journal of Development Economics, 2014, 106, 211–226.
Ferguson, James, Give a Man a Fish: Reflections on the New Politics of Distribution The
Lewis Henry Morgan Lectures, Duke University Press, 2015.
Gerard, Fran¸cois, Joana Naritomi, and Joana Silva, “Cash Transfers and Formal La-
bor Markets: Evidence from Brazil,” CEPR Discussion Papers 16286, C.E.P.R. Discussion
Papers June 2021.
H¨am¨al¨ainen, Kari, Ohto Kanninen, Miska Simanainen, and Jouko Verho, “Em-
ployment effects for the first year of the basic income experiment,” in Olli Kangas, Signe
Jauhiainen, Miska Simanainen, and Minna Ylika¨nno¨, eds., The basic income experiment
2017–2018 in Finland: Preliminary results, 2019.
Hanna, Rema and Benjamin A. Olken, “Universal Basic Incomes versus Targeted
Transfers: Anti-Poverty Programs in Developing Countries,” Journal of Economic Per-
spectives, November 2018, 32 (4), 201–26.
Haushofer, Johannes and Jeremy Shapiro, “The Short-Term Impact of Unconditional
Cash Transfers to the Poor: Experimental Evidence from Kenya*,” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 07 2016, 131 (4), 1973–2042.
Jakiela, Pamela and Owen Ozier, “Does Africa Need a Rotten Kin Theorem? Experi-
mental Evidence from Village Economies,” The Review of Economic Studies, 09 2015, 83
29

(1), 231–268.
Jones, Damon and Ioana Marinescu, “The Labor Market Impacts of Universal and
Permanent Cash Transfers: Evidence from the Alaska Permanent Fund,” Working Paper
24312, National Bureau of Economic Research February 2018.
Kansikas, Carolina, Anandi Mani, and Paul Niehaus, “Customized cash transfers:
financial lives and cash-flow preferences in rural Kenya,” Technical Report, UC San Diego
2022.
Kirchner, Laura, Ramo´n Sabes, Federico Todeschini, Ismael Blanco, Char-
lotte Fern´andez, Sergio Yanes, Amanda Hill-Dixon, Sergi S´anchez, Noem´ı
Ayguasenosa, Fabricio Bonilla, Filka Sekulova, Sebasti`a Riutort, and Albert
Juli`a, “Report on the preliminary results of the B-MINCOME project (2017-2018): Com-
bining a guaranteed minimum income and active social policies in deprived urban areas
of Barcelona,” Technical Report July 2019.
Liebman, Jeffrey, Kathryn Carlson, Eliza Novick, and Pamela Portocarrero, “The
Chelsea Eats Program: Experimental Impacts,” Working Paper, Rappaport Institute for
Greater Boston Working Paper December 2022.
Lo, T. Q., J. E. Oeltmann, F. O. Odhiambo, C. Beynon, E. Pevzner, K. P. Cain,
K. F. Laserson, and P. A. Phillips-Howard, “Alcohol use, drunkenness and tobacco
smoking in rural western Kenya,” Tropical Medicine & International Health, 2013, 18 (4),
506–515.
Orkin, Kate, Robert Garlick, Mahreen Mahmud, Richard Sedlmayr, Johannes
Haushofer, and Stefan Dercon, “Aspiring to a Better Future: How a Simple Psycho-
logical Intervention Increases Investment*,” 2022.
Parker, Susan W. and Tom Vogl, “Do conditional cash transfers improve economic
outcomes in the next generation? Evidence from Mexico,” Working Paper 24303, National
Bureau of Economic Research January 2021.
Salehi-Isfahani, Djavad and Mohammad Mostafavi-Dehzooei, “Cash transfers and
laborsupply: evidencefromalarge-scaleprograminIran,” Workingpaper1090, Economic
Research Forum 2017.
Schaner, Simone, “The cost of convenience? Transaction costs, bargaining power, and
savings account use in Kenya,” Journal of Human Resources, 2017, 52 (4), 919–945.
Schilbach, Frank, “Alcohol and Self-Control: A Field Experiment in India,” American
Economic Review, April 2019, 109 (4), 1290–1322.
Squires, M., “KinshipTaxationasanImpedimenttoGrowth: ExperimentalEvidencefrom
Kenyan Microenterprises.”
Suri, Tavneet and William Jack, “The long-run poverty and gender impacts of mobile
30

money,” Science, 2016, 354 (6317), 1288–1292.
, Prashant Bharadwaj, and William Jack, “Fintech and household resilience to
shocks: Evidence from digital loans in Kenya,” Journal of Development Economics, 2021,
153, 102697.
31

enilemiT
tcejorP
:1
erugiF
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. .
.
TS
TL
SL
srefsnarT
fo
tesnO
yevruS
HH
yevruS
redlE
egalliV
susneC
esirpretnE
yevruS
esuopS
yevruS
esirpretnE
susneC
&
yevruS
tekraM
yevrusenildnE yevrus
enohP
yevruS
tnargiM
.)lenap
mottob(
seitivitca
gnirehtag
atad
fo
noitubirtsid
laropmet
eht
dna
,)lenap
pot(
etad
tesno
refsnart
lautca
fo
noitubirtsid
eht
stolp
erugfi
sihT
:setoN
siht
morf
sisylanA
.0202
fo
enuJ
dna
hcraM
neewteb
enohp
eht
revo
yevrus
dlohesuoh
a
detcudnoc
ew
,erutcip
eht
ni
detciped
syevrus
eht
ot
noitidda
nI
siht
morf
sisylana
dna
,0202
fo
yaM
dna
hcraM
neewteb
sdlohesuoh
tnargim
htiw
syevrus
enohp
detcudnoc
osla
eW
.repap
siht
ni
derevoc
ton
si
atad
fo
tes
.repap
siht
ni
dedulcni
si
atad
32

stekraM
dna
sdlohesuoH
fo
noitarugfinoC
laitapS
:2
erugiF
ayaiS
)b(
temoB
)a(
.seitnuoc
ayaiS
dna
temoB
ni
)serauqs(
gnitneuqerf
detroper
sdlohesuoh
eseht
taht
stekram
lla
dna
)selcric(
sdlohesuoh
deyevrus
spam
erugfi
sihT
:setoN
.srefsnart
dereviled
ylsuoiverp
dah
DG
hcihw
saera
sessapmocne
ayaiS
fo
retnec
eht
ni
noiger
deidutsnu
ehT
33

tsevni
spuorg
TL
dna
SL
ylno
:)srefsnart
lautca
,I
hgih(
stluser
noitalumis
ledoM
:3
erugiF
sdoirep
ylraE
)b(
sdoirep
llA
)a(
.tnemtsevni
fo
doirep
eht
swohs
enil
dehsad
lacitrev
ehT
.stnemtaert
tnereffid
rednu
noitpmusnoc
dna
htlaew
fo
shtap
emit
eht
swohs
erugfi
sihT
:setoN
.0092=
I,012=
y,143=
y,2341=
w,6.0=
σ,5.1=R,59.0=
r,999.0=
δ,21=
S,27=
T
:swollof
sa
tes
erew
sretemaraP
0
34

tsevni
spuorg
lla
:)srefsnart
lautca
,I
wol(
stluser
noitalumis
ledoM
:4
erugiF
sdoirep
ylraE
)b(
sdoirep
llA
)a(
.tnemtsevni
fo
doirep
eht
swohs
enil
dehsad
lacitrev
ehT
.stnemtaert
tnereffid
rednu
noitpmusnoc
dna
htlaew
fo
shtap
emit
eht
swohs
erugfi
sihT
:setoN
.0541=
I,012=
y,143=
y,2341=
w,6.0=
σ,5.1=R,59.0=
r,999.0=
δ,21=
S,27=
T
:swollof
sa
tes
erew
sretemaraP
0
35

tsevni
spuorg
lla
:)srefsnart
regral
,I
hgih(
stluser
noitalumis
ledoM
:5
erugiF
sdoirep
ylraE
)b(
sdoirep
llA
)a(
.tnemtsevni
fo
doirep
eht
swohs
enil
dehsad
lacitrev
ehT
.stnemtaert
tnereffid
rednu
noitpmusnoc
dna
htlaew
fo
shtap
emit
eht
swohs
erugfi
sihT
:setoN
.0092=
I,012=
y,274=
y,2341=
w,6.0=
σ,5.1=R,59.0=
r,999.0=
δ,21=
S,27=
T
:swollof
sa
tes
erew
sretemaraP
0
36

Table 1: First-Stage and Compliance
Fall2019
Last40Days AmountRecd. TotalGDTransfers
(1) (2) (3)
LongTermArm 0.91∗∗∗ 1937.04∗∗∗ 56156.89∗∗∗
[.01] [55.6] [1506.37]
ShortTermArm 0.92∗∗∗ 1934.23∗∗∗ 55809.05∗∗∗
[.01] [31.5] [920.63]
LumpsumArm 0.00 2133.92∗∗∗ 62435.67∗∗∗
[0] [40.81] [1086.47]
R-squared 0.86 0.54 .95
ControlMean 0.00 0.00 0.00
ControlMedian 0.00 0.00 0.00
p-value: ST=LT 0.64 0.96 0.84
p-value: LT> ST 0.68 0.48 0.42
p-value: ST=LS 0.00∗∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗
p-value: LS> ST 1.00 0.00∗∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗
p-value: LS=LT 0.00∗∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗
p-value: LT> LS 0.00∗∗∗ 1.00 1.00
p-value: LT=ST=LS=0 0.00∗∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗
Observations 8426 8480 294
Col (1) is an indicator variable for whether or not a household received any payment in the last 40 days before the endline survey. Col (2) is the total USD
amount received by each household. Col (3) shows total GD transfers USD received in each village. All regressions include strata fixed effects. Standard
errors adjusted for spatial autocorrelation are reported in brackets, with statistical significance denoted as: ∗p<.10,∗∗p<.05,∗∗∗p<.01.
37

Table 2: Overall Village Aggregates: Summed
#Enterprises Revenues Costs NetRevenues Assets
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
LongTermArm 9.93∗∗ 61379.40∗∗ 32055.29∗ 28226.05∗∗ 36050.66∗∗∗
[3.96] [24346.05] [16478.13] [12334.27] [12589.11]
ShortTermArm 3.39 23177.47 8497.42 14824.71∗ 16441.81
[3.57] [16080.92] [10462.44] [8143.69] [10029.27]
LumpsumArm 14.67∗∗∗ 107746.75∗∗∗ 71903.23∗∗∗ 35576.39∗∗∗ 29404.54∗∗∗
[3.92] [34895.03] [24360.84] [13382.81] [10977.68]
R-squared .3 .24 .19 .27 .4
ControlMean 73.23 150207.24 92636.84 54533.59 100036.59
ControlMedian 70.07 126344.96 71651.40 45200.76 83927.59
p-value: ST=LT 0.12 0.13 0.15 0.33 0.11
p-value: LT> ST 0.06∗ 0.07∗ 0.08∗ 0.16 0.06∗
p-value: ST=LS 0.01∗∗∗ 0.02∗∗ 0.01∗∗∗ 0.14 0.23
p-value: LS> ST 0.00∗∗∗ 0.01∗∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗ 0.07∗ 0.11
p-value: LS=LT 0.27 0.24 0.15 0.65 0.59
p-value: LT> LS 0.87 0.88 0.92 0.68 0.30
p-value: LT=ST=LS=0 0.00∗∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗ 0.01∗∗ 0.01∗∗ 0.02∗∗
Observations 294 294 294 294 294
The non-agricultural enterprise data comes from the enterprise census while the agricultural enterprise data comes from the household survey and has been
scaled up to the village level using the sampling ratio. Columns (2)-(4) are for the last 30 days (for non-agricultural enterprises) and converted from annual
to monthly level (for agricultural enterprises). Enterprises with missing data assumed to be zero for the purpose of this analysis. The aggregates have been
calculated by summing up respective agricultural and non-agricultural sector aggregates at the village level. Total income data comes from the household
survey and has been scaled up to the village level using the sampling ratio. Total income includes wage earnings, agricultural net revenues, non-agricultural
net revenues, and capital income from interest on savings and net rents received. All regressions include strata fixed effects. Standard errors adjusted for
spatial autocorrelation are reported in brackets, with statistical significance denoted as: ∗p<.10,∗∗p<.05,∗∗∗p<.01.
38

Table 3: Agricultural and Non-Agricultural Village Aggregates
Ag Non-Ag
#Ent. Rev. Costs NetRev. Assets #Ent. Rev. Costs NetRev. Inv. Assets
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
LongTermArm 4.36 8521.72 5277.01 2137.42 29779.09∗∗∗ 5.57∗∗∗ 52857.68∗∗ 26778.28∗ 26088.63∗∗ 1766.12 6271.58
[2.93] [5523.36] [3785.31] [4615.71] [10833.07] [1.81] [22776.31] [15747.31] [11245.63] [1483.32] [6082.45]
ShortTermArm 0.49 10174.38∗∗ 5966.48∗ 4368.46 15558.74∗ 2.90∗∗ 13003.09 2530.93 10456.25 1411.88 883.07
[2.6] [5136.73] [3464.9] [4033.6] [8977.02] [1.35] [14778.92] [9819.96] [6713.02] [1222.48] [4328.38]
LumpsumArm 8.10∗∗∗ 13306.62∗∗∗ 8449.31∗∗∗ 4543.20 20301.19∗∗ 6.56∗∗∗ 94440.13∗∗∗ 63453.92∗∗∗ 31033.19∗∗ 3331.04∗ 9103.35
[2.68] [4576.77] [3111.32] [3880.54] [8654.36] [1.63] [33864.96] [24255.76] [12384.62] [1801.44] [6457.17]
R-squared .2 .51 .28 .46 .45 .45 .19 .17 .2 .29 .17
ControlMean 57.10 61554.32 30432.46 28089.51 86786.77 16.13 88652.93 62204.39 26444.08 5028.02 13249.82
ControlMedian 53.83 50356.59 23380.90 20260.07 70248.29 15.00 63386.46 49227.87 17928.76 2288.50 5076.47
p-value: ST=LT 0.21 0.79 0.86 0.66 0.18 0.13 0.09∗ 0.13 0.20 0.80 0.39
p-value: LT> ST 0.11 0.61 0.57 0.67 0.09∗ 0.07∗ 0.05∗∗ 0.06∗ 0.10 0.40 0.20
p-value: ST=LS 0.01∗∗∗ 0.56 0.47 0.97 0.58 0.02∗∗ 0.02∗∗ 0.01∗∗ 0.11 0.29 0.21
p-value: LS> ST 0.00∗∗∗ 0.28 0.24 0.48 0.29 0.01∗∗∗ 0.01∗∗∗ 0.01∗∗∗ 0.05∗ 0.14 0.10
p-value: LS=LT 0.23 0.40 0.40 0.63 0.34 0.60 0.27 0.19 0.74 0.38 0.70
p-value: LT> LS 0.88 0.80 0.80 0.68 0.17 0.70 0.86 0.91 0.63 0.81 0.65
p-value: LT=ST=LS=0 0.01∗∗ 0.03∗∗ 0.05∗ 0.59 0.03∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗ 0.01∗∗ 0.02∗∗ 0.02∗∗ 0.28 0.47
Observations 294 294 294 294 294 294 294 294 294 294 294
Data for agricultural enterprises in this table comes from the household survey and has been scaled up to the village level. Columns (2)-(5) have been
converted to a monthly level. Enterprises with missing data assumed to be zero for the purpose of this analysis. Agricultural revenues include the value of
crop output produced in the main and short seasons, the value of livestock products produced, and the value of livestock sold. Agricultural costs include
the land preparation costs, seed costs, fertilizer costs, fertilizer transportation costs, hired labor costs in the main and short seasons, as well as the rent
paid out on land rented in. Agricultural net revenues is calculated as the difference between agricultural revenues and agricultural costs. Agricultural assets
includes assets like tractors, grain stores, farm implements, machinery, etc. Data for non-agricultural enterprises comes from the enterprise census. All
regressions include strata fixed effects. Standard errors adjusted for spatial autocorrelation are reported in brackets, with statistical significance denoted as:
∗p<.10,∗∗p<.05,∗∗∗p<.01.
39

Table 4: Occupational Choice, Hours, Earnings, and Wage Rates
Overall Wage Employment Self Employment (Non-Ag) Self Employment (Ag)
Hours Income Hours Income Hours Income Hours Income
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Long Term Arm 61.92 503.40 -99.85∗∗ -275.53∗∗∗ 95.70∗ 692.69∗∗ 66.07 4.99
[67.8] [314.8] [46.45] [105.3] [54.74] [284.59] [53.18] [59.81]
Short Term Arm 110.23 671.60∗ -68.73 323.03 90.72∗∗ 215.67 88.24∗∗ 94.10∗
[77.59] [365.13] [47.18] [217.4] [45.69] [285.76] [40.92] [52.68]
Lumpsum Arm 79.42 1274.80∗∗ -27.30 272.42∗ 81.79 875.18∗ 24.94 41.59
[78.02] [571.56] [40.01] [149.54] [51.89] [520.79] [37.81] [50.11]
R-squared 0.13 0.03 0.11 0.03 0.04 0.01 0.12 0.05
Control Mean 2752.04 2517.63 1031.87 1478.71 522.78 589.43 1197.39 491.62
Control Median 2208.00 1097.09 240.00 211.93 0.00 0.00 848.00 201.52
p-value: ST = LT 0.57 0.65 0.56 0.00∗∗∗ 0.92 0.10 0.71 0.17
p-value: LT > ST 0.71 0.67 0.72 1.00 0.46 0.05∗ 0.65 0.91
p-value: ST = LS 0.73 0.31 0.36 0.80 0.88 0.20 0.15 0.41
p-value: LS > ST 0.63 0.15 0.18 0.60 0.56 0.10 0.93 0.80
p-value: LS = LT 0.83 0.10 0.13 0.00∗∗∗ 0.83 0.66 0.39 0.54
p-value: LT > LS 0.58 0.95 0.93 1.00 0.42 0.67 0.20 0.73
p-value: LT = ST = LS = 0 0.48 0.09∗ 0.15 0.00∗∗∗ 0.14 0.10 0.14 0.27
Observations 8300 8211 8300 8291 8300 8480 8300 8396
Columns (1), (3), (5), and (7) show total hours worked overall in the last 12 months on self-employed and wage work, wage work and, self-employed
agricultural and non-agricultural work respectively. Col (2) shows annualized non-transfer income in USD. Col (4) shows earnings from wage work over 12
months. Col (6) and Col (8) show annual non-agricultural and agricultural enterprise profits in USD. All regressions include strata fixed effects. Standard
errors adjusted for spatial autocorrelation are reported in brackets, with statistical significance denoted as: ∗p<.10,∗∗p<.05,∗∗∗p<.01.
40

Table 5: Consumption
Total Non-Food Food # Food Items Protein Education Health
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Long Term Arm 368.12 -15.47 387.69∗∗∗ 0.78∗∗ 52.53∗ 45.07 -115.57
[244.92] [187] [98.37] [.31] [28.44] [39.09] [83.5]
Short Term Arm 640.78∗∗ 261.28 365.79∗∗∗ 0.96∗∗∗ 67.24∗∗ 77.87∗∗ -75.35
[288.79] [201.61] [133.51] [.22] [26.2] [39.67] [93.46]
Lumpsum Arm 514.51∗ 281.82 229.53∗∗ 0.42∗ 61.17∗ 103.15∗∗ 70.88
[308.68] [244.85] [112.85] [.22] [32.61] [40.74] [118.37]
R-squared 0.13 0.12 0.09 0.04 0.05 0.15 0.01
Control Mean 7866.62 4043.84 3822.78 18.99 714.10 566.43 906.57
Control Median 5839.43 2117.24 3260.05 18.00 523.51 111.54 35.69
p-value: ST = LT 0.32 0.15 0.85 0.51 0.52 0.45 0.60
p-value: LT > ST 0.84 0.93 0.42 0.74 0.74 0.77 0.70
p-value: ST = LS 0.73 0.94 0.24 0.01∗∗ 0.83 0.63 0.14
p-value: LS > ST 0.63 0.47 0.88 0.99 0.58 0.32 0.07∗
p-value: LS = LT 0.61 0.18 0.13 0.21 0.78 0.22 0.08∗
p-value: LT > LS 0.69 0.91 0.06∗ 0.10 0.61 0.89 0.96
p-value: LT = ST = LS = 0 0.10∗ 0.17 0.00∗∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗ 0.08∗ 0.03∗∗ 0.23
Observations 8459 8459 8459 8365 8365 8480 8480
Col (1) shows total annual consumption expenditure on food, non-food items, education, and appliances. Columns (2), (3), (5), (6), and (7) look at annual
consumption expenditure on non-food items, food, protein, education, and health. Col (4) refers to number of food items consumed every week. Columns
(4)-(5)excludeindividualmigrants. Allregressionsincludestratafixedeffects. Standarderrorsadjustedforspatialautocorrelationarereportedinbrackets,
with statistical significance denoted as: ∗p<.10,∗∗p<.05,∗∗∗p<.01.
41

Table 6: Physical Assets
Real Estate (Value) Non-Real Estate (Value) Ag Ag Plots (Value)
Ag Res. Ag Non-Ag Res. Acreage Plot Structures Upgrades
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
Long Term Arm 3100.09∗∗∗ -216.05 348.91∗∗∗ 138.33 187.50 0.13 5622.17∗∗∗ 346.61 404.68∗∗
[1060.22] [151.1] [113.93] [199.41] [115.57] [.1] [2020] [495.43] [187.11]
Short Term Arm 2752.12∗∗∗ 81.36 293.64∗∗∗ 629.06 462.33∗∗∗ 0.18∗∗ 5059.81∗∗∗ 654.79 414.23∗∗
[756.99] [151.88] [96.40] [565.5] [144.11] [.09] [1363.45] [459.66] [161.97]
Lumpsum Arm 2291.15∗∗∗ -62.27 201.57∗∗ 550.03 399.14∗∗∗ -0.02 5109.34∗∗∗ 1932.53∗∗∗ 100.86
[779] [165.21] [90.84] [460.13] [151.03] [.09] [1587.11] [488.63] [144.94]
R-squared 0.15 0.03 0.09 0.01 0.07 0.05 0.12 0.05 0.02
Control Mean 14152.59 1145.79 1459.63 667.29 1432.06 1.61 25107.71 6628.15 946.68
Control Median 7436.23 0.00 838.44 0.00 645.65 1.00 12393.72 2478.74 0.00
p-value: ST = LT 0.67 0.11 0.65 0.40 0.05∗∗ 0.61 0.70 0.49 0.96
p-value: LT > ST 0.34 0.95 0.32 0.80 0.98 0.69 0.35 0.75 0.52
p-value: ST = LS 0.40 0.41 0.33 0.92 0.76 0.02∗∗ 0.97 0.01∗∗∗ 0.03∗∗
p-value: LS > ST 0.80 0.79 0.84 0.54 0.62 0.99 0.49 0.00∗∗∗ 0.98
p-value: LS = LT 0.29 0.41 0.10 0.32 0.17 0.07∗ 0.76 0.00∗∗∗ 0.07∗
p-value: LT > LS 0.15 0.80 0.05∗ 0.84 0.91 0.03∗∗ 0.38 1.00 0.03∗∗
p-value: LT = ST = LS = 0 0.00∗∗∗ 0.39 0.00∗∗∗ 0.41 0.00∗∗∗ 0.04∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗ 0.02∗∗
Observations 8161 8262 8480 8347 8480 7476 6943 7062 7483
Data for columns (1-5) comes from the endline survey. Data for columns (6-9) comes from the follow-up phone survey. For columns (1-2) and (7-8), we
exclude values in the top 1 percentile. Columns (1-2) show values of agricultural and residential real estate assets held by households. Columns (3-5) refer
to value of non-land agricultural assets (this includes farm and livestock assets), non-agricultural enterprise assets, and household assets (value of savings,
physical household assets, and net outstanding loans) held by each household. Col (7) refers to value of all the plots of land owned, excluding value of
any structures on the plot. Col (8) refers to the value of all built structures on the plot. Col (9) refers to any money spent in the last 5 years upgrading
the structures on the plot. All regressions include strata fixed effects. Standard errors adjusted for spatial autocorrelation are reported in brackets, with
statistical significance denoted as: ∗p<.10,∗∗p<.05,∗∗∗p<.01.
42

Table 7: Financial Assets
Borrowing Savings ROSCAs
HH Ent. HH Ent. No. ofROSCAs AnnualPaymentintoROSCAs
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
LongTermArm -89.85 2.19 69.14∗∗∗ 85.75∗ 0.09∗∗∗ 192.35∗∗∗
[68.53] [51.32] [22.99] [46.74] [.02] [32.53]
ShortTermArm 5.00 23.83 82.26∗∗∗ 45.68 0.02 22.36
[60.95] [36.12] [27.68] [40.61] [.01] [20.32]
LumpsumArm 26.94 221.26 76.77∗∗ 97.00∗ 0.03∗∗ 44.00∗∗
[61.43] [233.23] [33.25] [56.84] [.02] [21.95]
R-squared 0.02 00 0.03 0.01 0.11 0.09
ControlMean 425.84 56.54 241.46 149.90 0.32 274.45
ControlMedian 29.74 0.00 40.16 0.00 0.33 64.45
p-value: ST=LT 0.11 0.63 0.65 0.37 0.00∗∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗
p-value: LT> ST 0.95 0.69 0.67 0.19 0.00∗∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗
p-value: ST=LS 0.73 0.39 0.88 0.33 0.28 0.26
p-value: LS> ST 0.37 0.20 0.56 0.16 0.14 0.13
p-value: LS=LT 0.05∗ 0.26 0.80 0.83 0.00∗∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗
p-value: LT> LS 0.97 0.87 0.60 0.59 0.00∗∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗
p-value: LT=ST=LS=0 0.22 0.15 0.00∗∗∗ 0.24 0.00∗∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗
Observations 8356 8358 8363 8365 7519 7519
Col (1) refers to the net amount borrowed by the household while Col (2) refers to the total amount borrowed by non-agricultural enterprises. Col (3)
refers to household savings while Col (4) refers to the value of working capital held by a non-agricultural enterprise. Data for Col (5) comes from the survey
question - ”How many ROSCAS have you and members of your household participated in the last 3 years?”, and Col (6) refers to annual contributions
to ROSCAs by households. All regressions include strata fixed effects. Standard errors adjusted for spatial autocorrelation are reported in brackets, with
statistical significance denoted as: ∗p<.10,∗∗p<.05,∗∗∗p<.01.
43

Table 8: Inequality
Wealth Non-LandWealth Income Consumption Correlationb/w Correlationb/w
Ratio(75/25) Gini Ratio(75/25) Gini Ratio(75/25) Gini Ratio(75/25) Gini Bline&ElineAssets Bline&ElineCons.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
LongTermArm -0.26 -0.01 -1.09∗∗∗ -0.03 -88.33 -0.15 -0.06 -0.01 0.00 0.01
[.65] [.01] [.36] [.02] [54.08] [.64] [.13] [.01] [.04] [.04]
ShortTermArm -0.32 0.00 -1.48∗∗∗ -0.01 -26.28 -0.50 -0.16∗ -0.02 0.04 0.02
[.34] [.01] [.32] [.02] [26.73] [.54] [.09] [.01] [.03] [.03]
LumpsumArm -0.04 0.01 -1.63∗∗∗ 0.01 61.31 -1.14 0.05 0.00 0.04 0.05
[.32] [.01] [.36] [.03] [43.32] [.8] [.1] [.01] [.03] [.03]
R-squared .23 .27 .26 .13 .19 .18 .27 .17 .2 .11
ControlMean 4.58 0.50 5.55 0.59 13.73 1.18 2.62 0.38 0.40 0.38
ControlMedian 3.93 0.49 4.94 0.57 8.62 0.68 2.48 0.36 0.43 0.39
p-value: ST=LT 0.92 0.28 0.18 0.39 0.25 0.39 0.47 0.56 0.39 0.73
p-value: LT> ST 0.46 0.86 0.09∗ 0.81 0.87 0.19 0.24 0.28 0.80 0.63
p-value: ST=LS 0.38 0.85 0.57 0.63 0.17 0.36 0.04∗∗ 0.17 0.98 0.45
p-value: LS> ST 0.19 0.43 0.72 0.31 0.08∗ 0.82 0.02∗∗ 0.09∗ 0.49 0.22
p-value: LS=LT 0.70 0.23 0.08∗ 0.29 0.07∗ 0.20 0.45 0.54 0.41 0.35
p-value: LT> LS 0.65 0.89 0.04∗∗ 0.86 0.96 0.10 0.77 0.73 0.80 0.82
p-value: LT=ST=LS=0 0.78 0.62 0.00∗∗∗ 0.55 0.35 0.42 0.15 0.41 0.49 0.50
Observations 294 294 294 294 286 294 294 294 294 294
Col(1)showstheratioofwealth(measuredasvalueofallassets, thetop1percentiletrimmed)atthe75thand25thpercentiles, andCol(2)showstheGini
index for wealth. Col (3) shows the ratio of non-real estate wealth (measured as the value of all farm assets, livestock assets, enterprise assets, household
assets, savings, and net outstanding loans, the top 1 percentile trimmed) at the 75th and 25th percentiles, and Col (4) shows the Gini index for non-land
wealth. Col (5) shows the ratio of annualised non-transfer income (the top 1 percentile trimmed) at the 75th and 25th percentiles, and Col (6) shows the
Giniindexforannualisednon-transferincome. Col(7)referstotheratiooftotalannualconsumptionatthe75thand25thpercentiles,andCol(8)showsthe
Giniindexfortotalannualconsumption. Col(9)showscorrelationbetweenbaselineandendlineassetswhichincludehouseholdassets, landassets, financial
assets, enterprise assets, livestock assets, farm assets, and net value of loans. Col (10) shows correlation between baseline and endline expenditure on food,
cellular airtime, clothing, transport, education, and health. All regressions include strata fixed effects. Standard errors adjusted for spatial autocorrelation
are reported in brackets, with statistical significance denoted as: ∗p<.10,∗∗p<.05,∗∗∗p<.01.
44

Table 9: Softer Measures
Anthro. Yearsof KCPEScore MentalHealth Domestic Ladder:
Index Schooling >=250 CES-D Depressed(Y/N) LocusofCont. Violence Current
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
LongTermArm 0.00 -0.09 0.04 -1.97∗∗∗ -0.08∗∗∗ -0.20∗ -0.05 0.20∗∗∗
[.04] [.08] [.04] [.49] [.02] [.1] [.04] [.07]
ShortTermArm 0.07∗ -0.01 -0.00 -1.73∗∗∗ -0.07∗∗∗ -0.07 -0.06 0.22∗∗∗
[.04] [.07] [.03] [.44] [.02] [.09] [.04] [.06]
LumpsumArm 0.01 0.01 0.08∗∗∗ -1.03∗∗∗ -0.04∗∗ -0.09 -0.08∗∗ 0.21∗∗∗
[.04] [.06] [.03] [.38] [.02] [.08] [.04] [.06]
R-squared 0.14 0.44 0.05 0.23 0.17 0.06 0.02 0.09
ControlMean -0.54 7.82 0.57 16.43 0.47 16.75 0.00 4.39
ControlMedian -0.54 8.00 1.00 15.00 0.00 17.00 -0.27 5.00
p-value: ST=LT 0.15 0.30 0.26 0.61 0.59 0.21 0.84 0.81
p-value: LT> ST 0.93 0.85 0.13 0.69 0.71 0.90 0.42 0.59
p-value: ST=LS 0.13 0.79 0.01∗∗∗ 0.10 0.13 0.79 0.71 0.75
p-value: LS> ST 0.94 0.40 0.00∗∗∗ 0.05∗ 0.06∗ 0.61 0.64 0.62
p-value: LS=LT 0.94 0.20 0.20 0.04∗∗ 0.04∗∗ 0.36 0.54 0.98
p-value: LT> LS 0.53 0.90 0.90 0.98 0.98 0.82 0.27 0.51
p-value: LT=ST=LS=0 0.29 0.59 0.02∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗ 0.00∗∗∗ 0.22 0.16 0.00∗∗∗
Observations 10267 4398 2118 8219 8219 8341 4107 8323
Anthropometric index is the average of the weight-for-age and height-for-age z-scores of children aged 2-12 years at baseline. Years of schooling completed
is only for children present at baseline who would have made a primary to secondary transition. KCPE stands for Kenya Certificate of Primary Education.
Domesticviolenceindexincludeswhetherwomenreportedhavingbeenthreatened,hitorhadsomethingthrownatthemduringthepast30days. Depression
Index is calculated as a mean of responses to questions from the Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression questionnaire (scores range from 0-60).
Depressed(Y/N)usesacut-offscoreof16orgreaterontheCES-Dscalethataidsinidentifyingindividualsatriskforclinicaldepression. Locusofcontrolis
the degree to which people believe that they, as opposed to external forces, have control over the outcome of events in their lives, calculated here as a mean
of normalized responses to questions assessing the extent to which respondents felt in control of their lives. Quality of life ladder scale runs from 0-10 where
0 is the worst possible life and 10 is the best possible life. All regressions include strata fixed effects. Standard errors adjusted for spatial autocorrelation
are reported in brackets, with statistical significance denoted as: ∗p<.10,∗∗p<.05,∗∗∗p<.01.
45

A Related Studies
There is a large growing literature on interventions that are more or less closely related to UBI. The
closest are the regular unconditional cash transfers, either UBI or targeted Basic Income programs.
These are summarized below in Table A.1. To our knowledge there are two evaluations of a proper UBI,
one based on the Alaska Permanent Fund (Jones and Marinescu, 2018) and the other Iran’s nation-wide
UBI (Salehi-Isfahani and Mostafavi-Dehzooei, 2017). The former uses a synthetic control method, the
latter uses a difference-in-differences. In both cases the focus is on the labor supply effect, rather than
on changes in the overall well-being of the household.
In terms of an experimental evaluation, there are a number of evaluations of small targeted basic
income interventions, where the number of targeted individuals is 2000 or less. As a result they typically
cover a small fraction of the population of the area where they are being implemented. This means that
the studies typically do not capture the spillovers, both positive (say through demand and risk-sharing)
and negative (say through business-stealing) that would be expected when the program is more or less
universal. A previous evaluation of a Give Directly program in Kenya (Haushofer and Shapiro, 2016)
finds that household monthly consumption went up from $158 PPP to $193 PPP nine months after
the transfer, and the transfers had a sizable effect on self-reported measures of well-being (happiness,
life satisfaction, stress, and depression). Moreover the targeting has the potential to alter the impact;
for example, a program that targets the neediest may have much larger effect on nutrition, but for the
same reason may lead to fewer new businesses.
Results suggest that these interventions led to improvements in consumption/reductions in poverty
and self-reported well-being went up. Strikingly there is also no evidence of a significant reduction
in adult labor supply. For example, in the most recent GD study for parts of Siaya County (close to
one half of our UBI study sample), Egger et. al 2022 find that recipient households did not work less.
In fact, total hours worked by recipient households in agriculture, self employment and employment
increased slightly but not significantly. 17
There is also a substantial body of evidence from one time unconditional transfers similar to our LS
intervention. Banerjeeetal.(2015a)reportsonevaluationsfromsixcountriesoftheso-calledGraduation
program, a multi-faceted intervention targeted towards the poorest of the poor which combines an asset
transferwithsomeshort-termtraining/hand-holdingandsmallamountsoftemporarycashsupport. The
evidence suggests that beneficiary households work longer hours, and have durably higher consumption
levels. Balboni et al. (2021) reach a similar conclusion based on evidence from the same program
implementedinBangladeshandarguethattheinterventionmayhaveunlockedapovertytrap. Blattman
etal.(2013)alsofindsevidenceoflargegainsinearningsseveralyearsafteraninterventionwhichoffered
young men $400 in cash to start a livelihood.
The many experimental and quasi-experimental evaluations of Conditional Cash Transfer Programs
17The labor supply of children is potentially a very different outcome compared to adult labor supply, since there is a
strong case to be made that children should be in school rather than working.
46

constitute another closely related literature. These interventions have been shown to increase years
of schooling, improve health practices, nutrition and increase business creation, though the effects
on education and health practices are at least partly due to the conditions imposed on receiving the
transfers.18 These programs tend to target low income households with young children. In principle
this could means a relatively large fraction of the population in many developing countries receive it
- Progresa/Opportunidades reached a quarter of Mexican households–but the definition of low-income
and therefore eligibility varies a lot across countries. There is also variation how long a household stays
eligible–in Mexico, households typically become eligible to participate in this program at or just before
the birth a child and remain eligible until the child gets to high school as long as the child does not
drop out, so in principle the transfers can be very durable, but in Nicaragua’s RPS, for example, the
eligibility only lasted two years. In this sense these programs may be seen as a close parallel to our ST
and LT interventions.
On the other hand the fact that these program excludes many households both because of targeting
and the conditionalities, and the fact that the average amounts are relatively small means that the
overall additional inflow into the local economy from these programs is small compared to the 11-12%
we estimate for our interventions. For example, in 2000, Progressa covered about 2.6 million families
in 72,345 localities. The total amount of transfers delivered in 2000 was $934 million, equivalent to
about $1.4 billion in 2018 dollars (to allow a comparison to our transfers). This implies a transfer of
$19,000 per locality and $533 per family (Coady, 2000). This is about half of the size of our transfers
per recipient family and somewhere between 30% and 40% of households in the most marginalized
communities were covered by Progressa (see Figure 2 in (Parker and Vogl, 2021))
However the most important difference between these experiments and ours is however the fact that
we are set up to compare the three interventions, ST which is like some of the more short-term CCTs,
LT which is closer to some of the more durable CCTs, both without the conditionalities of course, and
LS which is related to the Graduation programs and other one-time transfer. From the point of view
of better policy design, these comparisons are obviously key.
18The evidence from the Malawi experiment which allows us to compare the education impacts of a Conditional Cash
Transfer to that of an Unconditional Cash Transfer suggests that a majority of the impact comes from the conditionality.
47

Table A.1: Evidence from Other Studies
Finland Stockton Spain Chelsea Compton Y-Combinator Iran Alaska
Annual Amount €6,720 $6,000 €3,000 - €7,800 $1,400-$2,800 $3,600-$7,200 $12,000 28% med income $2000
Type BI BI BI BI BI BI UBI UBI
Sample Size 2,000 125 1,000 2,074 700 1,000 Adults Adults
Duration (Years) 2 2 2 0.58 2 3 5-10 39
Labor Supply ↑ ↑∗ → - - ↑ →
Income NA NA NA - - - NA NA
Wealth NA NA NA - - - NA NA
Mental Health ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ - - - NA NA
GDP NA NA NA - - - NA NA
The number of arrows gives an indication of the effect size. For effects that are not statistically different from zero, we use a horizontal arrow, indicating no
evidence of an increase or decrease. NA stands for not applicable, i,e. the study does not have data on these outcomes. The Compton and Y-Combinator
studies are in progress and do not have results yet. For more on these studies, see:
• Finland: (H¨am¨al¨ainen et al., 2019)
• Stockton: https://bit.ly/45KLqll
• Spain: (Kirchner et al., 2019)
• Chelsea: (Liebman et al., 2022)
• Compton: https://bit.ly/3KZnGBU
• Y Combinator: https://www.openresearchlab.org/basic-income
• Iran: (Salehi-Isfahani and Mostafavi-Dehzooei, 2017)
• : Alaska: (Jones and Marinescu, 2018)
48

B Theory Appendix: Analysis
The model in Section 3 above can be analyzed as follows. Here, we use a verbal sketch of the analysis
of the model because we ultimately simulate out the model to show the key comparative statics.
L type households will consume their income in the LT arm because r < 1. However, in the ST arm,
L type households may consume less than their incomes order to smooth consumption. To see this,
assume that these households always consume their incomes. Then consumption optimality requires
that in period S −1
u(cid:48)(y ) ≥ δru(cid:48)(y )
1 2
which may not hold if y (cid:28) y .
2 1
Now suppose u(cid:48)(y ) < δru(cid:48)(y ). Then c < y . In this case, it is possible that it is also true that
1 2 S−1 1
u(cid:48)(y ) < δru(cid:48)(c )
1 S−1
which would imply that c < y . This saving on the part of L type households in the ST arm may
S−2 1
therefore start a few periods before the money runs out.
Moreover, their consumption is always non-increasing. This follows from the fact that either
u(cid:48)(c ) = δru(cid:48)(c )
t t+1
in which case it is automatic given δr < 1 or
u(cid:48)(c ) > δru(cid:48)(c )
t t+1
in which case c = w +y > c ≤ y ≤ y .
t t t t+1 t+1 t
If we then define the realized discounted utilities to be U(ST) and U(LT), the most interesting case
is the H type households in both the ST and LT arms.
For these households there are two choices: either behave like the L type households in each case, or
else save up to hit I.
In the latter case, suppose these households invest I in period T∗. Then, the following Euler equation
needs to hold as an equality in every period after T∗ : u(cid:48)(c ) = δRu(c ).
t t+1
Before T∗, these households will typically accumulate wealth (unless the household hits I in the first
period).
In any period after T∗, since people can always save at the rate R, the only possibility we need to
take into account is where u(cid:48)(w +y ) > δRu(cid:48)(y ). However, since δR > 1 and y ≤ y , this inequality
t t t+1 t+1 t
cannot hold.
In period T∗ and before, it is possible that the credit constraint binds and that u(cid:48)(c ) > δru(c ).
t t+1
However, just like for L types before period T∗ consumption must be non-increasing.
To see this, consider a period T ≤ T∗ such that in period T −1, the household does not save. Then
1 1
49