NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
A WELFARE ANALYSIS OF POLICIES IMPACTING CLIMATE CHANGE
Robert W. Hahn
Nathaniel Hendren
Robert D. Metcalfe
Ben Sprung-Keyser
Working Paper 32728
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32728
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2024, Revised February 2025
We thank Sarah Aaronson, Mira Chaskes, Aidan Creeron, Jamie Emery, Charlie Hutchinson, Jack
Kelly, Navya Kumar, Isaac Maruyama, Victor Mylonas, Sethu Odayappan, and Lukas Puschnig for
excellent research assistance. We thank Joseph Aldy, Lucie Gadenne, Ken Gillingham, Michael
Greenstone, Christopher Knittel, Mark Jacobsen, Al McGartland, Nick Muller, Ishan Nath,
Jacquelyn Pless, Brian Prest, Imran Rasul, Joe Shapiro, Alex Teytelboym, Rick van der Ploeg, and
Catherine Wolfram for their excellent comments and thank Jim Stock and Juan Carlos Suárez
Serrato for both their excellent discussions and additional comments. We also thank seminar
participants at the NBER Summer Institute Environmental & Energy 2024, Bank of England,
Carnegie Mellon, European Commission, HEC Lausanne, Harvard University, Institute for Fiscal
Studies, IMF and the World Bank, London School of Economics, Queen Mary, Paris School of
Economics, Toulouse School of Economics, Tulane University, University College London,
University of California San Diego, University of Chicago, and University of Oxford. We thank
Doyne Farmer and Rupert Way for helpful comments and for sharing their data. This research was
supported by Policy Impacts, which receives support from the Spiegel Family Fund. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Robert W. Hahn, Nathaniel Hendren, Robert D. Metcalfe, and Ben Sprung-Keyser. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Welfare Analysis of Policies Impacting Climate Change
Robert W. Hahn, Nathaniel Hendren, Robert D. Metcalfe, and Ben Sprung-Keyser
NBER Working Paper No. 32728
July 2024, Revised February 2025
JEL No. H0, Q5
ABSTRACT
What are the most effective ways to address climate change? This paper extends and applies the
marginal value of public funds (MVPF) framework to help answer this question. We examine 96
US climate-related policy changes studied over the past 25 years. These policies span subsidies
(wind, residential solar, electric and hybrid vehicles, vehicle retirement, appliance rebates,
weatherization), nudges (marketing, energy conservation), and revenue raisers (fuel taxes, cap and
trade). For each policy, we draw upon quasi-experimental or experimental evaluations of its causal
effects and translate those estimates into an MVPF. We apply a consistent translation of these
behavioral responses into measures of their associated externalities and valuations of those
externalities. We also provide a new method for incorporating learning-by-doing spillovers. The
analysis yields three main results: First, subsidies for investments that directly displace the dirty
production of electricity, such as production tax credits for wind power and subsidies for residential
solar panels, have higher MVPFs (generally exceeding 2) than all other subsidies in our sample
(with MVPFs generally around 1). Second, nudges to reduce energy consumption have large
MVPFs, with values above 5, when targeted to regions of the US with a dirty electric grid. By
contrast, policies targeting areas with cleaner grids, such as California and the Northeast, have
substantially smaller MVPFs (often below 1). Third, fuel taxes and cap-and-trade policies are
highly efficient means of raising revenue (with MVPFs below 0.7). We contrast these conclusions
with those derived from more traditional cost-per-ton metrics used in previous literature.
Robert W. Hahn Robert D. Metcalfe
University of Oxford Columbia University
and Carnegie-Mellon University and NBER
robert.hahn@smithschool.ox.ac.uk rdm2176@columbia.edu
Nathaniel Hendren Ben Sprung-Keyser
Massachusetts Institute of Technology The Wharton School
and NBER University of Pennsylvania
nhendren@mit.edu Philadelphia, PA 19104
bsprungk@wharton.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
What are the most e↵ective ways to address climate change? There is a robust and growing
literature examining the causal e↵ects of climate-related policy changes. These papers often
assess the e↵ectiveness of policies by measuring the cost per ton of carbon dioxide (CO )
2
abated. Yet, comparisons of these costs per ton across studies face several challenges. First,
the input assumptions in these calculations vary across papers. Second, there are at least three
distinct (and often conflated) definitions of the cost per ton of CO found in the literature:
2
(1) resource costs expended per ton of CO abated (Grubb et al. 1993, Enkvist et al. 2007,
2
Mullainathan & Allcott 2010, Greenstone et al. 2022), (2) government expenditures per ton of
CO abated (Gillingham & Tsvetanov 2019, Knittel 2009), and (3) social costs per ton of CO
2 2
abated (Hughes & Podolefsky 2015, Fournel 2024). Third, even if researchers were to align on
a single approach to measuring cost per ton, each of these metrics have inherent limitations
when assessing the welfare e↵ects of spending and revenue-raising policies. Resource cost per
ton of CO abstracts from the causal e↵ects of policy changes, ignoring the cost and benefits
2
of transfers to inframarginal individuals who do not change their behavior in response to those
policy changes. Government expenditures per ton of CO accounts for the cost of transfers to
2
inframarginal individuals but ignores the benefit of those transfers to their recipients. Social
cost per ton seeks to capture a comprehensive set of non-resource benefits but ignores the
opportunity cost of transfers to inframarginal individuals.
Itiswiththeseconcernsinmindthatweextendandapplythemarginalvalueofpublicfunds
(MVPF) framework to examine the welfare consequences of historical US spending and revenue
raising policies addressing climate change. The MVPF approach quantifies the net benefits to
individuals in society relative to the policy’s net government cost. These benefits and costs
incorporate behavioral responses to the policy and include inframarginal transfers, overcoming
theprimarylimitationsofthecostpertonapproach.1 Asanaddedbenefit,theMVPFfacilitates
policy comparisons both within and across policy categories, such as comparing climate policies
to public investments in education or healthcare.
WeapplyourMVPF-basedframeworktoacomprehensivesetofclimatepolicyinterventions
in the U.S. that a↵ect greenhouse gas emissions and have been rigorously evaluated in the past
25 years using experimental or quasi-experimental methods. This yields a sample of 96 policy
changes in three primary categories – subsidies, nudges and marketing, and revenue raisers.
Within the category of subsidies, we examine policies targeting wind production, residential
solar, electric and hybrid vehicle purchases, vehicle retirement, appliance rebates, and home
weatherization. Within the category of nudges and marketing, we examine energy conservation
policies such as home energy reports as well as marketing policies designed to encourage the
1To the best of our knowledge, Berkouwer & Dean (2019) and Christensen, Francisco & Myers (2023) were
the first to apply the MVPF framework in a climate setting. See also more recent work on peak energy usage
incentives and water audits (Jacob et al. 2023, Akesson et al. 2023), and the work of Kotchen (2022) and Prest
& Stock (2023) in using the MVPF framework as a lens to understand optimal environmental policy.
1

take-upofcleantechnologies. Withinthecategoryofrevenueraisers, weexaminegasolinetaxes,
taxes on other fuels such as jet fuel and diesel, and cap-and-trade policies. Lastly, we consider
an illustrative set of international policies, including subsidies for energy-e cient cookstoves
and deforestation-focused payments for ecosystem services.
Across all policies, we use a consistent method to translate a policy’s causal e↵ect on be-
havior into a valuation of that change in behavior. We proceed in two steps. First, we use a
harmonized method to translate changes in behavior (e.g., changes in car purchases or electric-
ity usage) into changes in emissions and other damaging outcomes (e.g., car accidents). For
example, in the case of changes in electricity production or electricity usage, we use estimates
from the EPA’s AVERT model to measure associated changes in emissions resulting from com-
positional changes in the grid (EPA 2024b). In the case of changes to vehicle purchases (e.g.,
EVs versus internal combustion), we estimate the change in gallons of gasoline used relative to
a counterfactual vehicle. We measure the total CO emissions associated with the upstream
2
production of gasoline and its combustion. We combine that with measures of local pollutants
released such as particulate matter. Second, we apply a consistent dollar value for each exter-
nality measured. For the social cost of carbon (SCC), we draw from recent work by the US
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (EPA 2023c) that places the social cost of carbon at
$193 in 2020 (and rising in the years to follow). We also explore the robustness of our results
to alternate measures of the social cost of carbon, ranging from $76 to $337 in 2020. For local
pollutants, we use estimates of the social cost of NH , HC, NO , PM and SO from the
3 X 2.5 2
AP3 integrated assessment model, which monetizes health impacts from air pollution exposure
using estimates on mortality and an associated value of a statistical life (VSL).
Our primary methodological contribution is the introduction of a new su cient statistics
approach to quantify the benefits of “learning-by-doing” e↵ects, which can then be directly
incorporated into the MVPF framework. There is a large literature that shows the prices of
new technologies such as solar cells, wind turbines, and batteries have declined with cumulative
global production (Way et al. 2022). These patterns often serve as a proposed justification for
subsidizing particular low-carbon technologies: subsidizing specific technologies with relatively
high abatement costs today may generate learning-by-doing spillovers that lower the future cost
of these technologies and generate future environmental benefits (Romer 1986, van Benthem
et al. 2008).
We show how these learning-by-doing e↵ects can be incorporated directly into the MVPF
framework. In particular, we show that when the marginal cost of production is an isoelastic
function of cumulative production and when demand is an isoelastic function of price, the time
path of production follows a second-order ordinary di↵erential equation that can be solved to
estimate the willingness-to-pay for the resulting learning-by-doing e↵ects.
Learning by doing generates two types of benefits: first, reductions in the future cost of
low-carbon technologies increase consumer welfare due to lower future prices, and second, these
2

price reductions serve to increase future take-up and, consequently, reduce future emissions.2
We apply our framework to study the potential implications of learning by doing for policies
that increase the current production of solar cells, wind turbines, and batteries. While we focus
here on learning-by-doing in the context of climate change, our framework can be used in other
industrial policy settings where there may be learning-by-doing externalities.
1.1 Findings
We have three main findings. First, we find that subsidies for investments that directly dis-
place the dirty production of electricity have higher MVPFs than all other subsidies in our
sample. Policies providing production tax credits for wind power and subsidies for residential
solar have MVPFs that generally exceed 2. In contrast, subsidies providing appliance rebates,
home weatherization, vehicle retirement, or subsidies for hybrid vehicle purchases have MVPFs
around 1. Electric vehicle subsidies have MVPFs around 1.5. The high MVPF values for wind
production tax credits and residential solar subsidies are robust to a wide range of values of the
social cost of carbon (e.g., $76 or $337). These conclusions are also robust to a wide range of
additional assumptions regarding the construction of the MVPF. This includes the valuation of
firm profits, the treatment of private energy savings, and the evaluation of non-marginal policy
changes. The inclusion of learning-by-doing e↵ects amplifies the MVPFs of these subsidies. In
the case of wind, the MVPF rises from 3.85 to 5.87 with learning by doing. In the case of
residential solar, the MVPF rises from a relatively low value of 1.45 to 3.86.3
Second, we find that behavioral nudges designed to reduce energy consumption can produce
largewelfaregainswhenadministeredinregionswithrelativelydirtyelectricgrids(withMVPFs
exceeding 5) but have lower MVPFs (below 1) in regions with cleaner grids.4 This finding also
suggests that the e↵ectiveness of these nudges will decrease over time as more electricity comes
from low- or zero-carbon sources.
Third, we find that implementing taxes on polluting goods can serve as an e cient means
of raising revenue. In the context of revenue raisers, the MVPF measures the welfare burden
imposed on individuals per dollar of revenue raised. This means that, all else equal, better
revenue raisers have lower MVPFs. We analyze taxes on gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel, along
with changes to the number of auctioned permits in cap-and-trade systems. We find that nearly
all of these revenue-raising policies have MVPFs below 1, with most having MVPFs below 0.7.
2Comparative statics of the model in Appendix B show that learning-by-doing externalities are generally
decreasing over time, providing a theoretical rationale for subsidizing early adoption.
3While the MVPFs of subsidies for new technologies are higher than other climate-focused subsidies, they
arenotnecessarilylargerthannon-environmentalspendingpolicies. Forexample, inpreviouswork, Hendren&
Sprung-Keyser (2020) found that policies providing direct investment in health and education for low-income
children had MVPFs often in excess of 5.
4This echoes the conclusions in Borenstein & Bushnell (2022), who suggest the returns to reducing energy
consumption are lowest in areas with clean grids. We find support for this conclusion in the context of energy
conservation nudges, despite the fact that previous work has found treatment e↵ects of nudges are larger in
more environmentalist areas (Allcott 2015).
3

This means that taxes on polluting goods impose a welfare cost of only $0.70 on society for
every $1 of revenue raised. This finding reflects the logic of Pigouvian taxation, quantifying
the e ciency of raising rates when current tax rates fall below the associated environmental
externalities.
While our primary focus is on US environmental policy, we also consider the welfare conse-
quences of US spending abroad on policies that address climate change. We find such subsidies
have the potential to produce high MVPFs, even when only considering the impact on US
beneficiaries and US taxpayers. For example, we consider the case of subsidies for the take-up
of e cient charcoal cookstoves in Kenya (Berkouwer & Dean 2022). Ignoring any benefits of
these stoves to local residents and ignoring any non-US benefits of CO reductions, the US-
2
specific gains from reduced CO emissions are 37 times larger than the net cost of the subsidy,
2
generating a higher MVPF than any domestic subsidy in our sample. (When considering the
full set of global benefits, the MVPF rises from 37 to 323). That said, there is substantial un-
certainty associated with these international subsidy estimates. The estimated impacts of these
policies often vary quite extensively, even within policy categories. As we discuss in Section 7,
the magnitude of the US-specific MVPF depends heavily on the incidence of the social cost of
carbon. In particular, it depends on the extent to which CO damages have incidence on US
2
residents and US government tax revenue.5
1.2 Relationship to Existing Literature
Our paper relates to an extensive literature in climate and environmental economics. It draws
upon a large body of estimates examining the causal e↵ects of individual policy changes and
builds upon a body of work conducting comparative analyses of climate policies.
This kind of comparative analysis was popularized in work by McKinsey & Company
(Enkvist et al. 2007), who calculated the resource cost per ton of CO abated for a wide
2
range of technologies. In recent years, alternative versions of this analysis have been performed
by groups such as the International Energy Agency (IEA 2020) and the Environmental Defense
Fund (Environmental Defense Fund 2021).
This line of work has been subject to criticism, both for the use of engineering estimates
relied upon to construct these measures of resource costs per ton (Fowlie et al. 2018, Brandon
et al. 2022) and for the focus on abatement cost of products rather than the abatement cost of
policies (e.g., a solar panel rather than a subsidy for a solar panel) (Kesicki & Ekins 2012). In
response, recent work has focused on the e↵ects of specific policy changes when constructing
estimates of cost per ton (see Gillingham & Stock (2018) for a broad compilation of such
estimates).
5Many models that agree on the level of the social cost of carbon still di↵er in the geographic incidence
of those damages and the split between market and non-market damages (e.g., productivity declines versus
mortality impacts.) The impact on US tax revenue is determined by the fraction of damages that reflects
US-specific productivity changes, as the US Treasury has an equity stake in those changes.
4

While the recent focus on policies rather than products speaks to an important criticism
of early abatement cost estimates, the definition of “cost per ton of CO ” still varies within
2
and across papers.6 In order to compare across cost-per-ton definitions and assess the relative
merits of the MVPF versus cost-per-ton metrics, we construct all three measures of cost per
ton for each of the 96 policies in our sample. Our analysis in Section 8 reveals substantial
variation in the cost per ton of each policy depending on the definition employed. For example,
the cost per ton of appliance subsidies ranges from -$2 to $474 across the three measures. The
resource cost per ton is -$2 because the long-run energy savings are estimated to o↵set the
higher upfront cost of the energy e cient appliance. By contrast, the government cost per ton
is $474 because subsidies lead to a large number of inframarginal transfers – money provided
to individuals who would have purchased the energy-e cient appliances anyway.
Even if one were to consistently apply a single definition of cost per ton when comparing
policies, the conclusions reached when using these metrics are not generally consistent with the
primary findings from our MVPF analysis. We can see this when examining each definition
of cost per ton in turn. From a resource cost perspective, appliance rebates have negative
costs, -$2, indicating they are far more cost-e↵ective than vehicle retirement or hybrid vehicle
subsidies, which have very high resource costs per ton at $1,007 and $577 respectively. When
comparing their MVPFs, however, their values are essentially indistinguishable: 1.16 versus
1.05 and 1.01.7 From a government cost perspective, the relative ordering of policies is broadly
consistent with the ordering generated by the MVPF. However, we find high MVPFs even when
the government cost per ton exceeds the SCC. In the case of electric vehicle (EV) subsidies, for
example, at an SCC of $193 per ton, we find an MVPF of 1.45 but a government cost per ton
of $1,356. This is driven by the omission of substantial benefits in the government cost-per-ton
calculation, including inframarginal transfer benefits and consumer surplus from learning by
doing. From a social cost perspective, we again find divergences from the MVPF ordering of
policies. For example, a core finding of our work is that the MVPF of wind subsidies and
residential solar subsidies exceed that of EV subsidies (5.87 and 3.86 versus 1.45). This is the
exact opposite of the ordering we find when using the social cost per ton. EVs have the lowest
social cost per ton (-$415) followed by residential solar (-$67) and wind PTCs (-$32).
In short, each of the various cost-per-ton metrics do not easily capture the insights of the
MVPF approach. In Section 8, we show that this is primarily because of their treatment
(or omission) of key factors such as inframarginal benefits, inframarginal costs, and non-CO
2
6Forexample,Table2ofGillingham&Stock(2018)compilesasetofcost-per-tonestimatesfromtheexisting
literature. The best policy listed is a behavioral nudge for reducing energy where the net resource cost of the
policy is reported. By contrast, residential solar panels appear to be one of the highest cost policies in their
sample, but the reported cost per ton measures the government cost of the policy.
7Patterns of this sort emerge repeatedly when comparing individual policies. For example, we construct a
resourcecostpertonforenergy-e cientrefrigeratorsstudiedinDatta&Gulati(2014)andfindavalueof-$512.
We do the same for wind PTCs in Hitaj (2013) and find a resource cost per ton of -$96. This relative ordering
is consistent with previous estimates from McKinsey & Company (Enkvist et al. 2007). Despite this, we find
the wind PTC has an MVPF that is much higher (4.63 versus 1.01).
5

benefits.8
Our approach also relates to a large literature on benefit cost analysis and its applications.
A traditional approach would compare the benefits of a spending policy to the distortionary
cost of raising revenue through a change in a linear income tax rate (Stiglitz & Dasgupta 1971,
Atkinson & Stern 1974). The MVPF approach extends this approach by allowing researchers
to choose from a menu of policies to close the budget constraint.9 For example, if one treats
individuals paying the gas tax and wind PTC beneficiaries as having similar social welfare
weights, the comparison of an MVPF of 5.87 for wind PTCs to an MVPF of 0.67 for gas
taxes suggests every $1 of government revenue raised from a gas tax and spent on wind PTCs
generates $5.20 (=5.87-0.67) in net benefits to individuals in society.10,11
Finally, our paper also builds on a literature discussing the role of policy in areas where
learning by doing is present (Bollinger & Gillingham 2019, Way et al. 2022, Bistline et al.
2023). Our approach relates most closely to work by van Benthem et al. (2008), who develop
a dynamic model of learning by doing and use it to simulate the desirability of solar subsidies
in California. Section 2.3 below shares many of the same features as their model. Our primary
methodological contribution is to provide a su cient statistics quantification of these learning-
by-doing e↵ects that can be directly incorporated into the MVPF framework. Moreover, we
provide conditions under which one can obtain a closed-form solution to the model, providing
a clear picture of how the results are determined by demand elasticities and the elasticity of
marginal costs with respect to cumulative production.
1.3 Roadmap
The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the MVPF framework and
outlines how it can be used to examine the welfare e↵ects of policies impacting climate change.
Section 3 discusses our sample of policies and methods for harmonizing the measurement of
externalities and the valuation of those externalities. Sections 4, 5, and 6 discuss our results
8AmodifiedversionofthesocialcostpertonimplementedbyFournel(2024)adjustsfortheopportunitycost
of inframarginal transfers using a “marginal cost of public funds” adjustment. This approach, however, yields
measures that vary significantly even within the set of common assumptions about the e ciency of income tax
policy. For example, we find a social cost per ton for EVs of -$259 when using a 10% adjustment and a positive
$260 when using a 50% adjustment. In contrast, the MVPF does not require researchers analyzing particular
environmental policies to take a stand on the e ciency of the income tax system.
9The MVPF is a form of benefit-cost ratio in which all benefits to individuals are incorporated in the
numerator of the MVPF while all government costs are incorporated in the denominator. As shown in Section
2, the MVPF measures an implicit Lagrange multiplier on a government budget constraint when choosing
policies to maximize social welfare.
10When policies a↵ect di↵erent groups of beneficiaries, one can use the MVPF framework to transparently
expressconcernsoverequity. Giventwopolicies,policy1andpolicy2,adecision-makerprefersabudgetneutral
policy that spends more on policy 1 financed by raising revenue from policy 2 if and only if that decision-maker
prefers giving $MVPF to policy 1 beneficiaries rather than $MVPF to policy 2 beneficiaries.
1 2
11In this literature, papers also measure welfare e↵ects by constructing total surplus or net benefits. The
MVPF approach is closely connected, but by measuring the per-dollar e↵ect of spending, it facilitates compar-
isons across policies when the scale of such policies di↵er.
6

for subsidy policies, nudge and marketing policies, and revenue-raising policies, respectively.12
Section 7 discusses our findings for a limited set of international subsidies. Section 8 contrasts
the MVPF with cost per ton measures, explaining how our main conclusions would di↵er had
we used those alternative welfare measures. Section 9 concludes.
2 Using the MVPF Approach for Policies A↵ecting Cli-
mate Change
We use the Marginal Value of Public Funds (MVPF) framework to examine the welfare impact
of a range of policies a↵ecting climate change. This section presents a formal modeling of
the MVPF framework, tailored to the context of environmental policy. We begin by using the
theorytoillustratehowmeasuresofwillingness-to-payandnetcosttothegovernmentofpolicies
feed into normative statements about the desirability of policy changes. After presenting the
framework, we then consider an illustrative policy of a subsidy for a good that has a positive
environmental externality. We show how we measure the willingness-to-pay and net cost.
Relative to existing literature, the key methodological contribution of this section is the
derivation of a new su cient statistics approach to incorporate learning-by-doing e↵ects when
examining the welfare consequences of subsidies. Section 2.3 below provides an overview of our
approach, and Appendix A provides proofs within a generalized model that is rich enough to
nest all of our policy applications.
2.1 Normative Framework
We consider a set of individuals indexed by i. This population contains all individuals globally,
including both current and future generations. We consider a decision-maker for a particular
country, whichwerefertoasthe“government”, thatseekstomaximizeasocialwelfarefunction,
W = u , (1)
i i
i
X
which is a weighted sum of individual utilities with Pareto weights . Increasing individual i’s
i
utility by 1 “util” leads to a increase in social welfare, W. We allow (but do not require) the
i
government to place positive weight on individuals outside its jurisdiction. We do not specify
particular weights in our analysis, but rather, we construct statistics that help a decision-maker
apply their own weights when deciding whether to make a given policy change.
We wish to measure the welfare gain (or loss) from modifications to government policy using
the causal e↵ect of policy changes that have been rigorously evaluated using quasi-experimental
12The Online Appendix provides a detailed description of the MVPF construction for each policy in our
sample.
7

orexperimentalmethods. Thesemethodsmeasurethecausale↵ectsofpolicychangesbyclearly
articulatingan‘orthogonality’conditionthatisolatesthecausale↵ectofapolicychangeholding
all else equal (e.g., the e↵ect of a tax or subsidy on behavior). To capture this, let p R index
2
a policy change where p = 0 corresponds to the status quo world. For example, ⌧ (p) = ⌧ +p
gas 0
could correspond to a change in the tax rate on gasoline relative to the status quo, ⌧ .
0
dui
To first order, individual i is willing to pay WTP = dp for the policy change, where   is
i  i i
the Lagrange multiplier on their budget constraint.13 The total e↵ect of the policy change on
social welfare, W, can be expressed as ⌘ WTP where ⌘ =   is the social marginal utility
i i i i i i
of income of individual i (providing individual i with $1 at time t = 0 leads to an ⌘ increase
P i
in W).
Next we consider the impact of the policy on the government’s budget. We can then write
the welfare impact per dollar spent on the policy in a manner that separates the normative
and positive aspects of the decision. Every dollar of net spending on the policy increases social
welfare by
dW
dp
= ⌘¯MVPF, (2)
dB
dp
where
WTP
MVPF = i i (3)
dB/dp
P
is the marginal value of public funds of the policy, which is the ratio of the sum of each
individual’s willingness-to-pay relative to the net cost to the government, and
WTP ⌘
⌘¯= i i i (4)
WTP
P i i
P
is the incidence-weighted average social marginal utility of income of the policy beneficiaries,
which depends on one’s social preferences and the incidence of the policy.14
One of the key advantages of the MVPF is that constructing an MVPF does not require
assumptions about how the budget constraint is closed for any given policy.15 Instead, the
MVPF framework can be used to construct budget-neutral policy experiments for the decision-
maker by comparing any two MVPFs. Let us consider, for example, two policies, 1 and 2. The
13Note that this measure represents the net benefits to individual i (i.e., monetized benefits minus the cost
of the policy to them). We discount the WTP for each person back to the time of policy implementation.
14To see this, note that
dW
⌘ WTP ⌘ WTP WTP
dp = i i i = i i i i i
dB | p=0 dB WTP dB
dp P dp P i i P dp
P
which equals ⌘¯MVPF.
15In contrast, the marginal excess burden (MEB) approach closes the budget constraint through individual-
specific lump-sum transfers, thus requiring researchers to measure compensated as opposed to causal e↵ects of
a policy. The marginal cost of public funds (MCPF) approach envisions closing the budget constraint through
changes in the linear income tax and incorporating the resulting deadweight loss from this tax change (e.g.,
Stiglitz & Dasgupta (1971), Atkinson & Stern (1974), Feldstein (1999)).
8

MVPF framework tells us that increased spending on policy 1 financed by raising revenue from
2 increases social welfare if and only if
⌘¯1MVPF1 > ⌘¯2MVPF2 (5)
where MVPF1 = i WTP i 1 is the marginal value of public funds of policy 1 (and similarly for
dB/dp1
P
2). For example, if policy 1 has an MVPF of 1 and policy 2 has an MVPF of 2, then raising
revenue from reductions in spending on policy 1 to finance increased spending on policy 2 will
increase social welfare if and only if the government prefers $2 going to policy 1 beneficiaries
to $1 going to policy 2 beneficiaries. While reasonable people may disagree about the relative
value of giving benefits to policy 1 versus policy 2 beneficiaries, such disagreements do not lead
to di↵erences in the value of the MVPFs. Instead, the MVPF simply serves to characterize the
trade-o↵s induced across policies. In cases when welfare weights are the same for policy 1 and
policy 2 beneficiaries, the di↵erence between MVPF1 and MVPF2 reveals the welfare gain to
individuals in the economy per dollar spent on policy 1 using net revenue raised from policy 2.
While there is value in reporting a single MVPF estimate, it is important to note that
policies may have multiple groups of distinct beneficiaries. Measuring the incidence of the
policy on di↵erent groups helps to capture distributional concerns that may be of importance.
In these cases, it can be helpful to decompose the MVPF and report the WTP as a sum across
sub-groups with their own WTP and social welfare weights. We can write:
WTP
g
⌘¯MVPF = ⌘¯ (6)
g
dB/dp
g
X
where ⌘ = i g
WTPi⌘i
is the incidence-weighted average welfare weight of those in group g
g
P
2
i g
WTPi
and WTP = 2 WTP is the willingness-to-pay for the policy by those in group g. Here,
g P i g i
MVPF = g
WTP2
g. The task of the researcher is to estimate the WTP for these groups along
dB P /dp g
P
with the net cost to the government, dB/dp. The policy maker must choose the weights they
place on di↵erent members of society, ⌘ .
g
In the context of our analysis, we focus our e↵orts on a comprehensive and accurate char-
acterization of the net cost to the government of the policy, dG, and the willingness-to-pay for
dp
the various sub-groups impacted by each policy in our sample. In our empirical analysis below,
we often discuss the orderings of policies using their aggregate MVPF, but we emphasize that
di↵erent policies may have di↵erent distributional incidences that should be incorporated into
an ultimate decision (i.e., decision-makers should apply their desired weights). The aim of our
analysis is to provide as detailed a breakdown as possible to facilitate these decisions.
9

2.2 Measuring WTP and Net Cost
Given a policy change that has been evaluated using experimental or quasi-experimental meth-
ods, how do we measure the net cost to the government and the willingness-to-pay for each
group of beneficiaries? We illustrate our approach with a simple example. Consider some good
x with an environmental externality. For example, x may be an electric vehicle or a gallon of
gasoline. Let V denote the monetized value of the environmental externality (or any external-
ity) resulting from additional consumption of x. Let p denote the price of x paid by consumers
and let ⌧ denote the current subsidy (or tax) on good x such that producers receive q = p+⌧.
Now, consider a policy change that alters the tax or subsidy on good x. For some infinitesimal
increase in the subsidy d⌧, the willingness-to-pay for the policy change is given by
WTP = xd⌧ +Vdx (7)
Here, the first term is the monetary value of the subsidy (holding behavior fixed due to the
envelope theorem), and the second term is the WTP from the change in the environmental
externality.
Implicit in equation (7) are assumptions of perfect competition and full pass-through. We
relax both of these assumptions in our implementation. In the presence of market power, the
change in ⌧ may not equal the change in price experienced by the consumer. Some of the price
increase might be borne by the producer. Moreover, the change in consumption generated by
the policy, dx, can generate a first-order benefit to firms. If consumers switch between goods
with di↵erent levels of mark-ups, firms may have a willingness-to-pay for the consumption
change due the di↵erential mark-up they receive. We incorporate these e↵ects in our empirical
analysis but omit them from the notation here for simplicity.
The dx in equation (7) is the causal e↵ect of the policy change. Upon first inspection, it
mightappearasthoughthevalueofdxcanbecalculateddirectlyusing“reducedform”evidence
on the e↵ect of the policy. A proper measure of dx, however, includes any “rebound” or broader
general equilibrium e↵ects that arise from the policy. These are not generally captured by most
reduced-form empirical designs and can increase or decrease the welfare impact of the policy.
For example, an EV subsidy may increase electricity demand. This can lead to slightly higher
energy prices and, thus, lower energy consumption even by those not receiving the subsidy.
This rebound e↵ect on energy demand needs to be included in order to accurately measure the
e↵ect of the policy. In Appendix D, we show how we are able to incorporate these rebound
e↵ects using estimates of the market supply and demand curves and discuss how we apply this
to account for the rebound created by upward-sloping local supply curves in the US electricity
markets.
Turning next to the cost to the government, the cost of the subsidy has two terms:
Cost = xd⌧ +⌧dx (8)
10

where the first term is the cost to the government of the subsidy change holding behavior, and
consequently x, fixed. The second term is the fiscal impact of the behavioral response to the
policy, ⌧dx. This is paid by the government but not valued by individuals due to the envelope
theorem.
The ratio of WTP to government costs yields the MVPF for a change in ⌧:
xd⌧ +Vdx
MVPF = (9)
xd⌧ +⌧dx
1+ V ( ✏)
= p   (10)
1+ ⌧( ✏)
p  
where ✏ = dx p = dxp is the percentage change in consumption of x in response to a 1%
  d⌧ x dpx
 
increase in consumer price (i.e., ✏ is the price elasticity of demand). Here, the environmental
impact of the policy change is given by the elasticity, ✏, times the environmental externality of
the good relative to the price of the good, V . The fiscal externality is given by the elasticity, ✏,
p
times the tax rate relative to the price of the good ⌧.16 A natural benchmark is the case where
p
⌧ = V. In this case, the government fully internalizes the externality with a Pigouvian tax or
subsidy, generating an MVPF of 1. When, as we often observe, the tax or subsidy diverges from
its Pigouvian level, that moves the MVPF away from 1. For example, the MVPF on a subsidy
can be very high if the per-dollar subsidy is well below the per-dollar externality benefit of the
good. In this sense, the MVPF measures the extent to which status quo policy deviates from
the optimal policy and quantifies the welfare gains of moving toward that optimum.
2.3 Learning by Doing
A common rationale for clean energy subsidies is that society can lower the future marginal cost
of new technologies by subsidizing their demand today (Acemoglu et al. 2012, Bistline et al.
2023). Industries, particularly those characterized by rapidly changing technologies, may learn
as the result of experience with production. These learning-by-doing gains mean that the cost
of production falls with the total production of a good. Subsidies that encourage production
today serve to bring down future costs by increasing total production. If the firms developing
these new technologies do not internalize these future benefits, then subsidies can be welfare
enhancing.
Existing evidence suggests that learning-by-doing e↵ects may be present in the production
of solar cells, wind turbines, and batteries. Appendix Figure 1 reproduces evidence from Way
et al. (2022) showing the relationship between the marginal cost per kW for wind and solar (and
per kWh of battery storage) plotted against cumulative production. Their analysis shows that
16In the presence of firm markups (e.g., due to market power), there are additional terms in this expression.
In the numerator, dx is multiplied by the firm markup net of taxes, and, in the denominator, dx is multiplied
by the corporate tax revenue from firm profits.
11

a 1% increase in cumulative solar production is associated with a 0.319% reduction in price. For
wind and EV batteries, the associated price reductions are 0.194% and 0.421%, respectively.
If one believes that these patterns reflect causal learning-by-doing spillovers,17 to what extent
should that change their views about the welfare e↵ects of subsidies for those goods?
The contribution of this section is to provide a new su cient statistics result that incorpo-
rates learning-by-doing e↵ects into the MVPF framework. Our approach relates to work by van
Benthem et al. (2008), who develop a dynamic model of learning by doing, and Bistline et al.
(2023), whoincorporatelearningbydoingintotheirassessmentoftaxesandsubsidies. Weshow
thatwhenthemarginalcostofproductionisanisoelasticfunctionofcumulativeproductionand
when demand is an isoelastic function of price, this leads to a second-order ordinary di↵erential
equation that can be solved to estimate society’s willingness-to-pay for the learning-by-doing
e↵ects. Theorem 1 derives a closed-form expression for this willingness-to-pay. It includes both
the benefits society gets from lower prices paid by consumers and the benefits society gets from
reducing future emissions due to earlier future purchases of the good. Appendix B provides a
formal derivation of these results along with a generalization to include imperfect competition
and firm markups, time-varying externalities, and cases where the learning curve only applies
to a subset of a product (e.g., batteries in EVs). Here, we present a simplified analysis that
highlights the core insights of the framework.
We return to our example of a subsidy for a good, x. In order to think about learning by
doing, we now bring the model into a continuous time environment, where time is indexed by
t 0. We imagine the subsidy of interest is a short-term subsidy enacted at time t . We wish to
⇤
 
incorporate the welfare benefits accruing in future periods, t > t . Let x(t) denote consumption
⇤
t
of x at each time t and let X(t) = x(s)ds+X(0) denote cumulative production through time
0
t. Motivated by the historical evidence in Appendix Figure 1, suppose that the marginal cost
R
of production at each point in time is an isoelastic function of cumulative demand,
c(X(t)) = X(t)✓ (11)
where ✓< 0 is the elasticity of marginal cost with respect to cumulative production. Suppose
also that the choice of x(t) at each point in time depends on the price with a constant price
elasticity of demand, ✏< 018
x(t) = ap(t)✏ (12)
17The extent to which the curve represents learning spillovers has been debated (Nemet 2006, Nordhaus
2014b, Rubin et al. 2015). See Lafond et al. (2022) for an estimate of the causal impact of learning by doing
on military production. In the context of this paper, we take these learning-by-doing e↵ects as given and then
showtherobustnessofourresultstotheomissionoflearning-by-doinge↵ects. Thereisquasi-experimentalwork
that has found evidence of potential spillovers in solar production (Banares-Sanchez et al. 2023) and in wind
installationsinCalifornia(Gillingham&Stock2018). WesupplementthisinAppendixTable1withadditional
descriptive evidence on this point. We show that the learning curves continue to hold even after controlling
for potentially confounding variables such as linear time trends and current production. This helps to rule out
contemporaneous supply shocks or historical trends unrelated to learning.
18In practice, our value of ✏ will come from our existing estimates on the causal e↵ect of a subsidy for x.
12

Finally, we assume that there is perfect static competition at all points in time and no future
subsidies so that prices are set equal to marginal cost, p(t) = c(X(t)).
Learning by doing generates two types of externalities: a price externality and an environ-
mental externality. The price externality arises because an increase in production of x(t) today
(e.g., at time t = t ) will generate consumer surplus via a reduction in prices faced by future
⇤
customers (at time t > t ). Let dp(t) denote this impact on prices at each time t. The envelope
⇤
theorem implies that the WTP for the price decline at each time t is given by dp(t)x(t), where
 
x(t) is the planned consumption at time t. In other words, the welfare gain is given by the
price reduction times the counterfactual path of consumption in the absence of the subsidy.19
The environmental externality arises because the price reduction caused by the subsidy will
increase future consumption of the good, dx(t), and, consequently, generate a positive environ-
mental externality. This externality is given by V dx(t), where we now introduce a t subscript
t
to allow the environmental externality to vary over time. For example, this allows the SCC to
increase or the cleanliness of the electrical grid to improve over time. The key to measuring
our two externality terms is that we need to know how much prices decline, dp(t), and how
much consumption increases, dx(t), in response to an increase in consumption of x today (e.g.,
at time t ). With those terms in hand, we can then integrate over all the future price benefits,
⇤
dp(t)x(t), and environmental benefits, V dx(t), over time t > t .
t ⇤
 
How can we use this setup to measure the future price and quantity impacts of a policy
that increases demand today? Our analysis relies on two key insights. First, we know that the
impact of a subsidy x(t) at some time, t , will a↵ect future prices proportional to the amount
⇤
that it increases cumulative production. While this e↵ect can be mathematically complicated,
the use of an autonomous supply and demand system allows us to re-frame the problem: we
can think of the subsidy as moving us forward in time by some amount, dt. That shift in time
is proportional to the size of the subsidy and the magnitude of the demand response when the
subsidy is operating at time t .
⇤
Moving forward in time lowers marginal costs at each point in time (and thus prices) by
19Weassumelearningbydoingprovidesknowledgeexternalitiestotheentiremarket. Itcouldbethatlearning
by doing occurs within firms and is fully internalized. In that latter case, a subsidy might have no learning-
by-doing price benefits for consumers. Moreover, learning-by-doing externalities are di↵erent from economies
of scale, which are about reducing the fixed costs of production. As Borenstein (2012) notes, this di↵erence
might have important implications for public policy. In our modeling, we provide an optimistic interpretation
of current subsidies lowering future costs through learning-by-doing externalities. In particular, we assume no
internal capture of learning-by-doing benefits and no economies of scale, although this assumption has been
questioned in the solar and wind industries (Nemet 2006, S¨oderholm & Sundqvist 2007). Such concerns would
dampenthemagnitudeofthetruelearning-by-doingbenefitsweestimateusingourapproach,butaswediscuss
below, this would not a↵ect our core empirical lessons.
13

dp(t), given by
dp(t) = c(X(t))X (t)dt (13)
0 0
= c(X(t))x(t)dt (14)
0
= ✓X(t)✓ 1x(t)dt (15)
 
Also, moving forward in time leads to a change in consumption of the good given by dx(t) =
X (t)dt.
0
Our second insight is that our demand and cost equations imply that the future time path
of x(t) is the solution to a second-order autonomous ordinary d↵eirential equation. To see
this, note that log(x(t)) = log(a) + ✏log(p(t)) and log(c(t)) = log() + ✓log(X(t)). Totally
di↵erentiating yields
dlog(x(t)) = ✏dlog(p(t)) (16)
= ✏dlog(c(t)) (17)
= ✏✓dlog(X(t)) (18)
(19)
Noting that X (t) = x(t) and the formula for the derivative of logs yields
0
X (t) X (t)
00 0
= ✏✓ (20)
X (t) X(t)
0
which is a second order autonomous ODE that we show has a closed-form solution. Combining
these two insights leads to the core result in Theorem 1.
Theorem 1. (Learning by Doing). Let the marginal cost be given by equation 11 and
demand be given by equation 12. Suppose prices are set at marginal cost in all periods. Then,
the MVPF of a subsidy at time t is given by
⇤
1+ V ( ✏)+DP +DE
MVPF = p   (21)
1+ ⌧( ✏)
p  
where the price externality, DP, is given by
DP = ✓✏(t ⇤ )  ✓( 1 1   + ✏ ✏ ✓ ) 1 e   ⇢(t   t⇤)t   1+✓ 1 1   + ✏ ✏ ✓dt (22)
Zt
⇤
where
X
init
t = (23)
⇤
x (1 ✏✓)
init
 
is the normalized ratio of cumulative to flow production at the time the subsidy is enacted, and
14

the environmental externality is given by
✏2✓
DE =  (1 ✏✓)c(X(t )) t ⇤ 1   ✏✓ ✏✓ 1 e   ⇢(t   t⇤)t 2 1 ✏   ✓  ✏✓ 1 V t dt (24)
  ⇤ Zt ⇤
Proof: See Appendix B.
This theorem provides an MVPF formula that allows for the explicit incorporation of
learning-by-doing externalities.20 This di↵ers from our static expression for the MVPF via
the inclusion of dynamic externalities (DE) and dynamic price e↵ects (DP). Calculating these
dynamic terms requires four inputs: (1) the elasticity of demand with respect to price, ✏, (2) the
elasticity of marginal cost with respect to cumulative production, ✓, (3) cumulative production
at the time of the subsidy X(t ), and (4) product cost at the time the subsidy, c(X(t )). ✏ and
⇤ ⇤
c(X(t )) are generally necessary for the construction of the static MVPF, indicating that only
⇤
two new terms, ✓ and X(t ), are needed to construct these learning-by-doing welfare estimates.
⇤
We use estimates of historical sales numbers to construct X(t ) and use estimates from Way
⇤
et al. (2022) of the relationship between cumulative production and price to construct our cost
curve parameter ✓. The price elasticities, ✏, come directly from each paper in our sample.
In our analysis below, we incorporate these learning-by-doing e↵ects into our estimates for
the MVPFs of subsidies for wind, solar, and electric and hybrid vehicles (and the indirect e↵ects
of gasoline taxes on EVs).
3 Data and Sample
3.1 Sample
We analyze the welfare impact of 96 US spending and revenue-raising policies that a↵ect
greenhouse gas emissions and have been rigorously evaluated in the last 25 years using quasi-
experimental or experimental methods. These policies span subsidies, revenue raisers, and
nudges. We form our sample from the full set of articles in 18 major journals in economics
from January 1999 through December 2023,21 and supplement that with a “snowball” sam-
20Appendix B provides the suitable generalization of the learning-by-doing analysis to the case when firms
have markups over marginal cost.
21Oursampleofjournalsincludes(inalphabeticorder)theAmerican Economic Journals (Applied, Economic
Policy, Micro, and Macro), the American Economic Review, the American Journal of Agricultural Economics,
Econometrica, theEconomic Journal, theJournal of Agricultural Economics, theJournal of Association of En-
vironmental andResource Economists, theJournal of Environmental Economics and Management, theJournal
of European Economic Association, the Journal of Political Economy, the Journal of Public Economics, the
Quarterly Journal of Economics, the Review of Economic Studies, the Review of Economic Statistics, and the
Review of Environmental Economics and Policy. We also include any National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Papers from the “Environment and Energy Economics” and “Public Economics” programs published
since 2018.
15

ple of articles cited within these papers.22 Within the category of subsidies, we analyze seven
sub-categories: wind production tax credits, rooftop solar subsidies, electric vehicle subsidies,
hybrid vehicle subsidies, vehicle buyback rebates, energy e ciency subsidies, and weatheriza-
tion subsidies. Within the category of revenue raisers, we analyze four sub-categories: gasoline
taxes, other fuel taxes (such as jet fuel and diesel taxes), other revenue raisers (including the
California Alternative Rates for Energy), and cap-and-trade policies. We also supplement this
sample with a selected set of international policies that have been evaluated in the past ten
years.23
Table 1 presents a list of all of our policies. For each policy, we list the category, sub-
category, year(s)ofimplementation, locationofimplementation, andthepaper(s)estimatingits
causal e↵ects. In certain cases, we observe some, but not all, of the relevant inputs necessary to
constructanMVPF.Inthoseinstances, weprovideanMVPFforthepolicy(underassumptions
outlined in each policy’s appendix) but only include it in our “extended” sample (denoted by
“*” in Table 1). Extended sample policies are excluded from any category averages reported in
the paper.
Publication Bias Whileweattemptedtoconstructacomprehensivesampleoftheliterature,
we are subject to potential biases arising from the fact that statistically significant studies are
more likely to be published. In Appendix F, we present evidence of modest publication bias
in the environmental economics literature: We find that estimates are roughly two times more
likely to be published if they cross a t-stat of around 2. In order to assess how this could impact
our broad conclusions, we use the methods of Andrews & Kasy (2019) to correct for publication
bias. We show this leaves our estimates largely unchanged and our conclusions una↵ected.
In-Context versus Baseline MVPFs For each policy change in our sample, we form two
conceptually distinct MVPF estimates. First, we construct a measure of the MVPF in the
context (year and location) in which the policy change occurred. For example, if we have
estimates from an EV subsidy program in California in 2014, we use measures of the CA electric
grid in 2014 to quantify the externalities due to reductions in gasoline usage o↵set by increased
electricity use. We use the CA gasoline tax rate in 2014 to quantify the lost state government
revenue from reduced gas purchases. These “in-context” MVPFs measure the welfare impact
of the policy as it was enacted.
Second, we construct an MVPF for each policy assuming it was implemented nationally in
the US in 2020. We do so by assuming the original elasticity estimated in each paper would also
determine the behavioral response to the federal policy in 2020. We then use those estimated
elasticities along with 2020 measures of the tax rates and values of externalities to measure
22We also form an ”extended sample” of MVPF estimates for policies where we are unable to construct key
components of the MVPF, and we exclude these policies from each category average measure discussed below.
23Wealsoincludeseveralanalysesofregulatorypolicies(CAFEstandardsandrenewableportfoliostandards)
and show how to nest these into our framework. See Appendix G.
16

the environmental and fiscal externalities from the policy. This approach harmonizes welfare
comparisons across policies holding the contextual environment fixed. We refer to this as our
“baseline” MVPF.
In Section 4, we discuss how the harmonization of our estimates a↵ects our results. Our
high-level findings do not vary between our baseline and in-context MVPFs. That said, there
are some cases where the distinction matters. For example, vehicle emissions were higher in
previous decades, increasing the in-context MVPF for vehicle retirement policies implemented
in the earliest years in our sample.
3.2 Valuing Environmental Externalities
We seek to apply a consistent and comprehensive method for valuing the range of externali-
ties generated from each policy. We discuss these valuations briefly here and refer readers to
Appendix C for a detailed discussion of our approach.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions CO is a key greenhouse gas contributing to climate change.
2
Our baseline estimates place a monetary cost on CO emissions following the Environmental
2
Protection Agency’s 2023 guidance regarding the social cost of carbon at a 2% discount rate
(EPA 2023c).24 This model implies a social cost of carbon (SCC) of $193 per ton for emissions
in 2020 and is increasing over time.25 We also show the robustness of our results to models
with 2020 SCCs of $76 and $337.26
We use the time path of the SCC to measure the environmental externality from each
policy. For example, a subsidy that leads to the installation of a wind turbine in 2020 will
reduce emissions from 2020 through 2045. We use the year-specific SCC to value the associated
externalities. For consistency, we apply the 2% discount rate to translate costs and benefits
into 2020 present-value dollars.
In addition to CO , we also incorporate costs from other greenhouse gases where available,
2
including methane (CH ), nitrous oxide (N O), carbon monoxide (CO), and hydrocarbons
4 2
(HC). For the baseline scenario corresponding to the $193 SCC in 2020, the social costs of
methane and nitrous oxide in 2020 are $1,648 and $54,139 in 2020, respectively (EPA 2023c).
For carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons, we use global warming potential (GWP) factors from
Masnadi et al. (2018) of 2.65 and 4.5 to convert these into CO equivalent units, CO e, and
2 2
then apply our baseline social cost of carbon.
There are three key things to note about our approach to quantifying the value of reducing
24This is the typical discount rate used by environmental economists (Nesje et al. 2023).
25This SCC of $193 in 2020 aligns closely with several other estimates from integrated assessment models
(IAMs), such as the GIVE model in Rennert et al. (2022).
26The $76 (calculated with a 2.5% discount rate) SCC comes from Interagency Working Group (2021) and
represents the largest SCC estimate for 2020 presented in earlier guidelines. The $337 (calculated with a 1.5%
discount rate) represents the largest SCC for 2020 reported in the EPA’s most recent guidelines (EPA 2023c).
17

greenhouse gas emissions. First, we require the SCC to be the sum of individuals’ private
willingnessestopayforreducedCO emissions. Thisisconsistentwithapproachtakenintypical
2
Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs). RICE and DICE focus on GDP or GDP-equivalent
damages, which correspond to private measures of damages. Other IAMs, such as the GIVE
model, infer an SCC from VSL estimates and use private VSLs that are not adjusted with
welfare weights. Again, these models generate an SCC that corresponds to a private willingness
to pay. By contrast, some have proposed equity-weighted social costs of carbon that adjust for
welfare weights when forming the SCC (Prest et al. 2024). While the MVPF framework allows
for equity weights, such weights are most appropriately excluded from the MVPF and instead
applied ex-post when making policy comparisons, as in equation (5).
Second, the SCC embeds within it a real discount rate (2% in our baseline case) that
captures the real cost to society of moving resources across periods. The application of this
discount rate normalizes the willingness to pay in units of 2020 dollars for all comparisons, even
across future generations. This discount rate does not, however, make any claims about the
decision-maker’s preferences across time. If a decision-maker places greater (or lower) weight
on future generations, they will simply place a higher (lower) social welfare weight on those
future beneficiaries. In the context of equation (5), this represents a modification of ⌘¯ to reflect
weights on future generations.
Third, our MVPF calculations rely on estimates of the incidence of the social cost of carbon.
In particular, the MVPF approach separates the willingness to pay for a policy from its net cost
to the government (the US government, in our case). Calculating these components, therefore,
requires identifying the incidence of the SCC on the US government’s budget. To account for
this in our baseline specification, we assume an incidence that follows the US share of GDP in
the global economy of 15%, which corresponds to the assumption made in many models such
as DICE (Nordhaus 1993).27 Within this 15%, we assume in our baseline specification that
50% of this valuation is the result of changes in productivity that have direct e↵ects on tax
revenue (e.g., due to changes in agricultural productivity).28 We assume a tax rate of 25.54%
as this is the 2020 tax-to-GDP ratio for the US (OECD 2021), which captures both corporate
and individual (labor income) taxes. These numbers imply that 13% of the incidence from
changes in carbon emissions falls directly on US residents while just under 2% falls on the US
government as changes in tax revenue. As it turns out, accounting for this fiscal externality
has no bearing on any of our results for domestic subsidies, nudges, or revenue raisers.29 It
27Other IAMs explicitly measure the distributional incidence of global damages. For example, Nordhaus
(2014a, 2017) notes that the three models from the Interagency Working Group (Interagency Working Group
2021) on the social cost of carbon report US incidences of 10% for RICE2010 (Nordhaus 2010), 17% for
FUND2013 (Antho↵ & Tol 2010, 2013b,a), and 7% for PAGE2011 (Hope 2006, 2008).
28We note that many models that agree on the level of the social cost of carbon arrive at their headline
number with di↵erent underlying components in their calculations. They di↵er in their split between market
and non-market damages (i.e., impacts on productivity as measured via change in GDP versus valuations of
mortality using a VSL.)
29TheshareoftheincidencefallingontheUSTreasuryissu cientlysmallthatmodificationsinourincidence
assumptions do not impact our findings. Using alternate values for the geographic incidence of the SCC or the
18

does, however, significantly a↵ect some conclusions regarding international policies where the
US-specific fiscal externality can get quite large. In that section, we analyze the robustness of
our conclusions to those incidence assumptions.
Local Pollutants While greenhouse gases yield global externalities, other pollutants primar-
ily a↵ect individuals residing near the source of emissions. These local pollutants generally
produce negative e↵ects via their impact on individual health. In order to value these exter-
nalities, we use the AP3 integrated assessment model (Tschofen et al. 2019), which measures
the marginal health impacts of additional emission of NH , HC, NO , PM , and SO in
3 X 2.5 2
each county in the US.30 We monetize those health impacts using a VSL of $9.5 million (EPA
2010).31
From Causal E↵ects to Externalities For each policy in our analysis, we translate its
causal e↵ect (e.g., purchases of EVs in response to subsidies) into the externalities it generates
(e.g., the various pollutants discussed above) using a consistent approach across all policies.
For example, consider policies that alter electricity usage. Some of these policies, such as
residential solar subsidies, might generate new sources of electricity. Other policies, such as
rebates for energy-e cient appliances, might reduce existing electricity usage. In order to
identify the change in emissions from changes in electricity generation, we use estimates from
EPA’s Avoided Emissions and Generation Tool (AVERT) (EPA 2024b). This provides year-
and location-specific estimates of marginal emissions rates per kWh of electricity generated.
We also consider a class of policies that a↵ect vehicle usage and gasoline consumption. In those
cases, we estimate the change in gallons of gasoline used relative to a counterfactual vehicle. We
measure the total CO associated both with the upstream production of gasoline and with its
2
combustion. We draw upon estimates from National Emissions Inventory, the Inventory of U.S.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks, as well as the EIA’s reported CO emissions coe cients.
2
We describe these estimates in detail in Appendix C.
Appendix Figure 2 presents the environmental damages from driving and using electricity
over time. Panel A presents the dollar value of the local and global externalities generated
per gallon of gasoline used by the average light-duty, gasoline-powered vehicle. It shows that
average non-CO emissions have declined over the last several decades, and there has been a
2
shift in the share of total pollution externalities driven by CO emissions.32 Panel B reports
2
split between market and non-market damages does not impact any of our primary findings.
30To measure the local pollution externality from increased electricity usage, we take county-level damages
estimated in AP3 and weight by fuel consumed for electricity generation. To measure the local pollution
externality from increased gasoline vehicle usage we weight by county-level total vehicle miles traveled.
31Unlike our estimates for the damages of global pollutants, we do not vary these marginal damages over
time. This is because the damage function associated with marginal carbon emissions is time-varying, but the
health impacts of local pollutants do not follow a clear time path.
32The graph also includes the impact of other vehicle externalities – congestion and accidents. For vehicle
accidents,weuseresultsfromJacobsen2013b,whoestimatesthata1%reductioninvehiclemilestraveledleads
to263fewerfatalitiesintheUS.WeagainapplyaVSLof$9.5milliontoyielda$0.08per-mileexternality. For
19

average emissions from the electric grid over time. It shows a gradual reduction in emissions
as more clean energy (and lower-carbon energy) has come online. This is supplemented by
evidence in Appendix Figure 3, which shows the geographic variation across the US in emission
externalities, as measured in 2020. The Northeast and California have the cleanest grids (lowest
environmentalexternalitypermWh)relativetotheMidwest,whichhasthedirtiestelectricgrid.
We discuss below how this leads to heterogeneity in the welfare impacts of policies that are
targeted to di↵erent regions of the US.
4 Subsidies
The next four sections of the paper present our results for the MVPFs of subsidies, marketing
and nudges, revenue raisers, and international policies. We begin with subsidies and a detailed
description of the way in which we construct MVPF estimates for EV subsidies. We choose this
example because it utilizes nearly all of the machinery we develop to construct environmental
MVPFs. We then provide shorter descriptions for each of the remaining subsidy policies across
each of our sub-categories. (See the Online Appendix for a detailed construction of each MVPF
in our sample.) Finally, we compare MVPFs across sub-categories, identifying the types of
policies that produce the highest MVPFs.
Subsidies for Electric Vehicles Over the past 15 years, many US states and the federal
government have o↵ered a range of subsidies to encourage the purchase of electric vehicles. We
draw upon three papers measuring the response of EV purchases to federal or state subsidies,
beginning with an analysis of the California Enhanced Fleet Modernization Program (EFMP)
studied by Muehlegger & Rapson (2022). The EFMP subsidized EV purchases, varying the
availability and the size of the subsidy based on each household’s income and the zip code in
which they resided. Muehlegger & Rapson (2022) use this variation to estimate that roughly
85 percent of the subsidy was passed through to consumers while 15% was captured by dealers
via higher prices. They also estimate that a one percent decrease in the price of EVs led to a
2.1 percent increase in EV purchases.
We use these estimates to construct baseline and in-context MVPFs for the subsidy. We
focus our discussion here on the baseline MVPF, which takes the estimated elasticity of -2.1
and considers the welfare e↵ect of a national subsidy change implemented in 2020.33
Figure 1 presents the components of the WTP and net cost estimates used in the construc-
tion of the MVPF. All components are normalized by the mechanical cost of the subsidy change
(i.e., the cost if individuals did not change their behavior). By construction, individuals are
willing to pay $1 per $1 in mechanical subsidy cost. The pass-through rate on the subsidy
congestion due to light-duty vehicles, we take an average of externality measures from Parry & Small (2005),
Parry et al. (2014), and Couture et al. (2018) to yield an externality of $0.03 per mile.
33Appendix Table 2 presents the results for the in-context MVPF.
20

means $0.85 flows to those purchasing vehicles and $0.15 flows to the owners of CA dealerships
that sell EVs.
The next bars in Figure 1 report the environmental externalities associated with marginal
EV purchases. We begin by estimating the change in externalities from reducing the usage of
internal combustion engine (ICE) vehicles as individuals purchase EVs. We use estimates from
Holland et al. (2016) to calculate the fuel economy of the counterfactual car that a marginal EV
customer would have purchased. We find that EVs displace a cleaner-than-average new light-
duty car.34 We then combine this counterfactual fuel economy (41.2 MPG) with an estimate
of the per-gallon externalities associated with gasoline. This includes both the global damages
from CO emitted as well as the local damages from NO , PM , HC, CO, SO , and NH .
2 X 2.5 2 3
We measure these damages over an average 17-year lifespan of the vehicle (Greene & Leard
2023). We also use estimates from Zhao et al. (2023) to account for the fact that EV purchasers
tendtodrivetheircarsfewermilesthantheaveragepurchaserofagaspoweredvehicle.35 Taken
together, thelocalandglobalpiecesprovidethelifetimeenvironmentalbenefitsfromnot driving
the counterfactual gas-powered vehicle. This calculation leads to a WTP of $0.17 from global
pollutants and $0.02 from local pollutants, for a total benefit of $0.19 from the reduced gasoline
consumption induced by the subsidy.
While the decrease in gasoline consumption yields environmental benefits, these e↵ects are
partially o↵set by the environmental damages from increased use of electricity. We incorporate
the emissions from additional electricity usage over the lifespan of the EV using emissions
estimates from the EPA’s Avoided Emissions and Generation Tool, AVERT (EPA 2024b).36
Combining the change in emissions with our valuations of those externalities, we find that the
$1 subsidy results in $0.10 in global damages stemming from electricity usage and $0.02 in
local damages. This yields a total welfare cost of $0.12. When combined with the damages
avoided from gas-powered cars, society is willing to pay $0.07 for the net global benefit and
approximately $0 for the net local benefit.
Some of the estimated increases in electricity usage from EVs could be o↵set through in-
creases in the prices of electricity that drive down usage – i.e. a “rebound e↵ect”. To account
for this, we use estimates of the demand and supply elasticity for electricity. Following the De-
partment of Interior’s approach in their MarketSim model, we use a demand elasticity of -0.19
and a supply elasticity of 0.78 (DOI 2021). Combining these estimates implies that roughly
20% of the electricity demand is o↵set by reduced demand due to higher electricity prices.37
34Holland et al. (2016) estimate the counterfactual ICE vehicle purchased by EV buyers in 2013–2015. We
take the percentage increase in MPG relative to the MPG of new cars in 2014 and apply that to the new car
MPG figure in 2020. Below, we explore the robustness of our results to this particular MPG assumption and
show it does not meaningfully impact our results.
35Zhao et al. (2023) show that the average EVs’ vehicle miles traveled is roughly 61% of the average gas-
powered car. This estimate is very similar to those in Davis (2019) and Burlig et al. (2021).
36We project future grid emissions using the mid-range 2023-2050 forecast from the Princeton REPEAT
Project (Jenkins & Mayfield 2023) in combination with estimates from the AVERT model that translate com-
bustion shares into externalities.
37We do not incorporate a rebound e↵ect for gasoline because we assume that the gasoline price does not
21

This suggests that society is willing to pay an additional $0.02 for the global benefits (and less
than $0.01 for the local benefits) created by the rebound e↵ect. Summing the environmental
benefits yields a total of $0.09.38
In addition to environmental externalities from charging the EV, we also account for the
fact that the upstream production of EVs is more carbon-intensive than the production of ICE
vehicles. This is due to the nature of the battery production process. We incorporate estimates
from Winjobi et al. (2022) that suggest that battery production releases 0.06 tons of CO per
2
kWh. This suggests the average EV imposes a global externality from battery production of
$838.34 per EV, leading to an externality of -$0.03 per dollar of EV subsidy. This rounds to a
total environmental externality of $0.07 per dollar of EV subsidy.
In the case of EVs, there could also be learning-by-doing externalities in battery production.
Way et al. (2022) estimate that a 1% increase in battery production leads to a reduction
in battery costs of 0.42% (✓ = 0.42). Following the approach outlined in Section 2.3, we
 
incorporate the impact of learning by doing into the MVPF of EV subsidies. Using the demand
elasticity of ✏ = 2.1 and discounting future benefits at a 2% discount rate, the increased
 
future demand for EVs yields environmental benefits of $0.04 per dollar of the mechanical
subsidy (DE in Theorem 1). In addition to the environmental benefits, the e↵ect of learning
by doing on future prices creates a benefit of $0.31 to future purchasers (DP in Theorem 1).39
Taken together, the learning-by-doing e↵ects increase the value of the subsidy by $0.35 per
dollar of EV subsidy.
It is worth noting that the inclusion of these $0.35 in learning-by-doing benefits relies on
the assumptions that i) the relationship between cumulative production and price is causal
and ii) that these benefits are not internalized by firms through the patent system or other
means. If the price declines were not causal and/or the e↵ects are internalized by firms, the
$0.35 should not be included in the MVPF. Throughout, we present results with and without
learning-by-doing e↵ects so that readers can view the results for their preferred specification,
based on their judgment of the learning by doing evidence.
The last benefit we consider is the impact of the policy change on the profits of gasoline
and electricity producers. Our estimates suggest a marginal EV purchase in 2020 would reduce
gasoline consumption by 2,857 gallons over the lifetime of the vehicle. We account for producer
profits using an average markup per gallon of gas of $0.61 per gallon, or 27% of the 2020 retail
meaningfully change in response to the demand shock induced by EV purchases.
38Due to the envelope theorem, the change in electricity consumption from the rebound e↵ect does not
generate private welfare costs. Only the externalities that are not internalized matter for the total willingness
topayintheeconomy. Inadditiontotheenvironmentalexternalities, themarkupintheelectricitymarketalso
generates a small additional externality on firm profits, which is incorporated into the firm profit numbers that
we report.
39These learning by doing e↵ects only apply to battery production, rather than than the production of the
entirevehicle. Batteriesmadeuponlyroughly25%ofthecostofEVsin2020,mutingthenetimpactoflearning
by doing on future EV prices. Appendix B discusses how we account for this dynamic in learning by doing. We
alsoshowthatwhenonlyafractionofthecostsaresubjecttolearningbydoing, thevalueoftheseexternalities
falls more rapidly over time.
22

price. This lies above the economy-wide average markup of 8% (De Loecker et al. 2020), leading
to a decline in overall producer profits as consumers shift away from gasoline consumption to
other goods.40 Applying a 21% e↵ective corporate tax rate, we calculate post-tax lost producer
profits are equal to $0.04 per dollar of the subsidy.41 By contrast, electricity suppliers benefit
from increased electricity consumption. Electric utilities are a regulated industry with natural
monopolies that sell electricity at a markup. We estimate this markup to be 12.9% in excess
of the 8% economy-wide markup. While some of these profits flow directly to the government
as 28% of utilities are publicly owned, private utilities also have a willingness to pay for their
increase in after-tax profits. We estimate this WTP to be $0.01 per $1 of subsidy.
The numerator of the MVPF is the sum of these components. Figure 1 shows these yield
a total WTP of $1.38 in benefits per mechanical dollar of spending. The figure also illustrates
the incidence of the subsidy: Roughly 95% of the benefits of EV subsidies flow to those buy-
ing and selling EVs, while 5% flow to current and future generations through reductions in
environmental externalities.
Next, we calculate the denominator of the MVPF, which is net cost of the subsidy to the
government. Each of these components is reported in Figure 1. We begin with the mechan-
ical cost of the subsidy, which is $1 by construction. We then consider the fiscal externality
induced by pre-existing subsidies. When the subsidy causes an EV purchase, this generates an
additional government cost equal to the pre-existing subsidy level. In 2020, federal credits for
EVs had expired for most companies, such as Tesla, and so the average federal subsidy was just
$42.98. Meanwhile, the average state subsidy was $604.27. The existence of these pre-existing
subsidies means that the increase in EV purchases cost state governments $0.02 and the federal
government $0.001 per each dollar of mechanical subsidy. (We obtain these numbers using
equation 9 and multiplying the change in EV demand by the size of the pre-existing subsidy as
a fraction of the total price of the vehicle).
In the next step, we consider the impact of the policy on tax revenue collected. The reduced
gasoline consumption leads to a loss in gas tax revenue for the government of $0.04 for every $1
in subsidy. It also causes a reduction in corporate tax revenue of $0.01 per dollar of subsidy.42
Finally, we incorporate a positive impact on the US government’s budget due to reductions
in climate damages. According to a wide class of IAMs, the SCC is driven by a combination
of health and productivity e↵ects. These productivity e↵ects can have a direct e↵ect on US
government revenue. In our baseline specification, we assume that half of the SCC is due to
productivity e↵ects and that 15% falls on the US economy (proportional to its share of global
40Appendix C.4.5 relates these gasoline producers’ markups to the producer profit rates reported in
(De Loecker et al. 2020).
41WeobtainthecorporatetaxratefromWatson(2022). Wealsousethatforegonetaxrateestimatetoadjust
the net cost of the policy. This tax rate does not vary over time. In 2020, the pre-tax markup on gasoline was
$0.27 per dollar spent on gas, or $0.21 per dollar spent on gas after adjusting for corporate taxes.
42While the policy increases utility profits, it also generate losses for gasoline producers. The sum of these
two is a net decrease in government revenue.
23

GDP). Applying a 25.5% tax rate to these productivity gains yields a fiscal externality equal
to $0.003 for every $1 in subsidies. These “climate fiscal externality” e↵ects are quite small for
all domestic policies in our sample, but we return to them in Section 7 when we analyze the
MVPFs of international policies.
Adding these costs together, we estimate a net cost of $1.07 for every $1 in mechanical
subsidy costs. When we take the ratio of the willingness-to-pay and the net cost, we arrive at
a baseline MVPF of 1.30. The MVPF of 1.30 means that a $1 increase in a 2020 subsidy for
EVs would have led to $1.30 in benefits for members of society.
This baseline MVPF considers the welfare impact of a marginal change in EV subsidies
relative to their 2020 levels. We can also use the framework to assess larger (non-marginal)
policy changes. In 2022, for example, federal credits were increased to $7,500 as part of the 2022
Inflation Reduction Act. Appendix Figure 4 illustrates the MVPF of a non-marginal policy
that increases the total subsidy level from $647 to $8,104 in 2020. The first dollar of the subsidy
has an MVPF of 1.30. We can similarly construct the MVPF of each marginal dollar of subsidy
expansion.43 As the subsidy increases, the MVPFs fall slightly. This is because the fiscal
externalities are increasing in the size of the pre-existing subsidy. The MVPF on the 7500th
dollar is 1.02.44 Integrating over all the marginal policy changes for subsidy levels between $647
and $8,104 yields an average (non-marginal) MVPF of 1.15. The non-marginal value of 1.15
looks relatively similar to our baseline first dollar MVPF estimate of 1.30, a pattern we see
consistently in our evaluation of non-marginal subsidy changes.
In estimating the welfare e↵ects of EV subsidies, we consider two other policy changes
studied in the literature. Clinton & Steinberg (2019) study variation in subsidy generosity over
states across time, finding an elasticity of demand with respect to price of -2.93. Li et al. (2017)
use variation in the federal credit over time to measure EV demand, yielding a price elasticity
of demand of -2.61. The estimated elasticities from these two papers lead to MVPFs of 1.56
and 1.47 in our baseline specification (with the larger MVPF driven by the stronger elasticity).
In order to draw lessons from these MVPF estimates, it is helpful to pool them together
and form a category average. Following Hendren & Sprung-Keyser (2020), we imagine the
government spends $1 in initial program costs, splitting the programmatic expenditures evenly
across the three EV policies. We construct an average WTP and average net cost across these
policies and take the ratio to form a category average MVPF. This leads to an estimated
baseline MVPF of 1.45 for EV subsidies.
TheMVPFisnotmuchabove1becausethecostofinframarginaltransfersislarge. Inducing
anewEVpurchasecoststhegovernmentroughly$30,00045, muchlargerthantheenvironmental
43In this calculation, we assume the price elasticity of demand remains constant as the subsidy increases. We
find similar results under alternative assumptions such as a constant semi-elasticity of demand.
44In principle, it is possible for the MVPF to increase with subsidy size. This occurs if V/p rises faster than
the fiscal externality (e.g., ⌧/p). This is possible because p is inclusive of the subsidy.
45EV prices in 2020 were approximately $54,000. The product of the price elasticity and pass-through rate
fromMuehlegger&Rapson(2022)is-1.78,implyingapaymentofapproximately$30,000perinducedpurchase.
24

and learning-by-doing benefits of the subsidy.
One of the key advantages of our harmonized approach to measuring MVPFs is that we can
explore the e↵ect of varying input assumptions. For example, we can adjust our assumptions
regarding the MPG of counterfactual ICE vehicles or the VMT of EVs. If we assume that EVs
replace an average new car, rather than a more-e cient-than-average new car, the category
average MVPF rises from 1.45 to 1.61. If we assume that the VMT of an EV is equal to that of
an average car, rather than the lower VMT figures estimated in the literature, the MVPF rises
from 1.49 to 1.62. The MVPF also rises from our baseline 1.45 to 1.53 if one assumes the EVs
are charged using a grid as clean as California’s. Switching to an SCC of $76 and associated
discount rate of 2.5% yields a baseline MVPF of 1.33. Increasing the SCC to $337 with a
discount rate of 1.5% yields a baseline MVPF of 1.57. As noted above, the learning-by-doing
benefits play a key role in driving the MVPF estimates above 1. The MVPF falls to 0.96 if
learning-by-doing e↵ects are excluded. Ultimately, across our various alternative specifications,
the MVPFs of EV subsidies fall in a range between 1 and 1.7.
Wind Subsidies Wenextexaminethewelfareconsequencesofproductiontaxcredits(PTCs)
that encourage the production of wind energy. These subsidies pay producers a fixed payment
per kilowatt hour of production of clean energy, typically for ten years after installation. We
draw upon three papers estimating the elasticity of wind turbine investment with respect to
these production tax credits in the US: Hitaj (2013), Metcalf (2010), and Shrimali et al. (2015).
We also supplement these results with six elasticity estimates from papers studying the impact
of variation in feed-in-tari↵ rates in Europe.46
We begin by using the results in Hitaj (2013), which uses local variation in wind production
incentives between 1998 and 2007 to estimate impacts on wind installation. The estimates
indicate that a one percent decrease in the cost of wind electricity generation leads to a 1.13
percent increase in wind turbine installations.
Figure 2 Panel A presents the components of WTP and net government cost using the
elasticity from Hitaj (2013). Producers are willing to pay $1 for a dollar’s worth of mechanical
subsidy. Next, we measure the environmental benefits of the PTC. We measure the environ-
mental benefits of wind turbine installations using the EPA’s AVERT model to measure the
grid displacement from an additional unit of clean energy. We find that a $1 mechanical subsidy
leads to a large reduction in both global and local environmental externalities, valued at $3.93
and $0.52, respectively.47 These benefits are larger than the per-dollar benefits for EVs despite
a smaller price elasticity (the elasticity is -1.13 as opposed to -2.1 for EFMP above). This is
Allcott et al. (2024) examine the MVPF of recent EV subsidies and find a very similar figure.
46We do not provide in-context estimates for non-US studies, but instead focus on the implications of their
price elasticity estimates for the US 2020 MVPF of wind subsidies.
47In translating the PTC into a change in wind turbine prices, we discount the flow of benefits using a firm-
specificmeasureofthecostofcapital. Thisallowsustousefirm-specifictimepreferences,atopicofsubstantial
importance in current debates over the ITC versus the PTC.
25

because $1 of induced spending on a wind turbine delivers significantly more than $3 of global
environmental benefits while $1 of induced spending on an EV generates less than $0.04 in
global environmental benefits.
As with EVs, we incorporate potential rebound e↵ects in the electricity markets. In contrast
to EVs, the rebound e↵ect leads to an increase in overall electricity use as opposed to a decline.
Market supply and demand curves imply a 20% rebound e↵ect due to lower prices, which
means that environmental benefits are $0.87 lower. We also account for life cycle greenhouse
gas emissions (11 g of CO e per KWh) from activities such as turbine manufacturing and
2
construction, which decrease environmental benefits by $0.13 (Dolan & Heath 2012). Summing
together, this implies a net initial environmental benefit of $3.45.48
Next, we incorporate the potential benefits from learning-by-doing externalities. Way et al.
(2022) estimate that a 1% increase in cumulative production leads to a reduction in wind
turbine costs of 0.19% (✓ = 0.19). This leads to $1 in future environmental benefits and $0.46
 
in benefits from lower future prices of wind turbines. Combining together all our willingness to
pay components produces a net WTP of $5.90 per dollar of mechanical wind PTC.
Inordertoestimatenetgovernmentcosts, webeginwiththe$1mechanicalcostofthepolicy
and add the fiscal externality associated with the baseline PTC subsidy. In 2020 there was a
PTC subsidy equal to 1.5 cents per kWh, which leads to a fiscal externality of $0.35 per dollar
in mechanical subsidy. Long-run climate benefits also generate a negative fiscal externality of
$0.08. Taken together we estimate a net cost of $1.28. Dividing the WTP of $5.90 by this net
cost yields an MVPF of 4.63.
Figure2PanelBplotstheMVPFestimatesforwindsubsidiesandshowshowtheyvarywith
the magnitude of the price elasticity. The other two studies we consider have elasticities of -1.3
(Metcalf 2010) and -1.75 (Shrimali et al. 2015), yielding MVPFs of 5.30 and 7.55, respectively.49
We draw upon three quasi-experimental estimates of the impact of PTCs in the US. In
order to ensure that our results are not being driven by the small sample of available quasi-
experimental estimates, we compare our results to studies of wind subsidies outside the US. In
particular, we consider six elasticities estimated in Europe. These estimates primarily focus on
the e↵ects of “feed in tari↵” policies that guarantee producers elevated prices for their clean
energy generation. Figure 2 Panel B places the US-based MVPF estimates alongside six MVPF
estimates that use elasticity estimates derived from variation in “feed in tari↵s” in European
contexts. These European subsidy elasticities range from -0.60 to -1.97 and yield MVPFs
48We do not include any aesthetic costs associated with the installation of wind turbines. One could, in
principle, estimate the associated individual WTP and incorporate that into the MVPF.
49Wetranslatetheelasticitiestothe2020baselinesettingbyassumingtheelasticityofturbinesinstalledwith
respect to price is constant over time. As turbine costs fall, a constant elasticity implies a rising semi-elasticity
and larger environmental benefits per dollar of subsidy. If we adopt a more conservative assumption that the
semi-elasticity is constant over time (despite prices falling more than half between the mid-2000s and 2020) we
obtain a category average MVPF of 2.86. This continues to lie above all other subsidy categories in the sample
except residential solar subsidies.
26

ranging from 1.50 to 9.15. The category average MVPF using only US policies is 5.87. If we
were to include European subsidy estimates the value is very similar, rising slightly to 5.93.50
These results using European elasticity estimates further reinforce the conclusion that subsidies
for wind PTCs produce substantial returns per dollar of government expenditure.
Residential Solar Subsidies The US federal government and many US states have enacted
large subsidies to encourage residential solar installation. We analyze estimates from five sub-
sidies for residential solar that are studied in four papers (Pless & van Benthem 2019, Hughes
& Podolefsky 2015, Gillingham & Tsvetanov 2019, Crago & Chernyakhovskiy 2017). We begin
with Pless & van Benthem (2019) who use geographic variation in the California Solar Initia-
tive to estimate the e↵ect of the program. They find that a one percent reduction in the price
of solar installations leads to a 1.14% increase in installations among residential homeowners.
This elasticity of -1.14 is roughly at the mean of the solar elasticities in our sample.
Figure 3 Panel A presents the components of the WTP and net cost of the MVPF. Pless
& van Benthem (2019) find that the subsidy has roughly 81% pass through, so that a $1
mechanical subsidy leads to an $0.81 benefit to consumers and a $0.19 benefit to installers.
Forenvironmentalbenefits, the$1mechanicalsubsidyleadsto$0.73inglobalenvironmental
benefits through the displacement of other sources of electricity production. This is the sum of
$1.03 in benefits via direct displacement of energy production minus $0.20 from the rebound
e↵ect and $0.10 from life cycle greenhouse gas emissions in the production of the solar panels.
We also find $0.11 in local environmental benefits, which is the sum of the direct ($0.14) and
rebound e↵ects (-$0.03). These environmental benefits are larger than the benefits from EVs,
buttheyaresmallerthanthebenefitsforwindPTCs. Thelowerenvironmentalbenefitsrelative
to wind PTCs is not primarily due to di↵erences in the price elasticities but rather the fact that
$1 of private spending on residential solar panels delivers fewer environmental benefits than $1
spent on utility-scale wind production. As we discuss below, this is driven by the di↵erence
between residential and utility scale, as opposed to wind versus solar.
While the initial environmental benefits from residential solar subsidies are smaller than
those associated with the wind PTCs, the learning-by-doing benefits are larger. We find the
solar subsidies induce $1.08 in environmental benefits and $0.86 in price benefits. These higher
learning-by-doing e↵ects are driven by the fact that: (i) the historical learning rate for solar,
50Therehasbeenrecentattentiononregulatorycostsforrenewableenergiessuchaswindpower(Jarvis2021,
Davisetal.2023,Huang&Kahn2024). Itisimportanttonotethattheexistingcausalestimatesshouldalready
embedwithinthemtheregulatorycostsinplaceatthetimeofestimation. Wearenotawareofanycausalwork
intheUSthatquantifiestheextenttowhichchangingregulatorycostsa↵ecttheLCOEofwindproduction. As
noted above, however, if we assume that that the cost of wind generation is actually 50% higher than reported
estimates, we find that our category average MVPF in the U.S. is still 4.51. Along similar lines, we can assume
that increased permitting costs o↵set all the observed cost decline of wind turbines between 2014 and 2020. In
that case, we would still get MVPF estimates for wind near 5. In fact, the superiority of wind subsidies relative
to EVs and other energy e ciency subsidies continues to hold even if the LCOE were to double relative to
current measures.
27

✓ = 0.32, is well above the historical learning rate for wind; and (ii) the demand elasticity for
 
residential solar is higher in absolute value than for wind.
Lastly, we consider the impact of reductions in purchase of electricity on the profits of the
utility companies. Subtracting this value, $0.12, from the other components of willingness to
pay, we arrive at a total value of $3.67 per dollar of mechanical subsidy.
To estimate net government costs, we begin with the $1 mechanical cost of the policy.
Existing subsidies for solar were 26% in 2020. Multiplying the increase in solar purchases by
this subsidy yields a fiscal externality of $0.32 for every $1 of mechanical subsidy.51 We also
estimate a reduction in tax revenue of $0.06 from falling utility company profits and a climate
fiscal externality of -$0.03 from increased future tax revenue due to reduced climate change
damages. Taken together, this means that $1 of mechanical subsidy costs the government
$1.35. Comparing this value to the willingness to pay yields an MVPF of 2.71.
Figure 3 Panel B compares across our solar estimates and presents the MVPFs as a function
of the price elasticity in each study. We present two curves to illustrate the MVPF with and
without including the learning-by-doing e↵ects. The MVPFs are quite large when learning-by-
doing e↵ects are present. We find MVPFs ranging from 1.63 to 5.06 for the elasticities in our
main sample, with a category average of 3.86. By contrast, when learning-by-doing e↵ects are
excluded the MVPFs fall substantially, with MVPFs ranging from 1.17 to 1.69 and a category
average of 1.45.
Even with learning by doing e↵ects, residential solar subsidy MVPF estimates are sub-
stantially lower than our estimates for wind PTCs (3.86 versus 5.87). This di↵erence may be
driven by the distinction between utility-scale and residential energy production, rather than
the distinction between wind and solar. With falling solar prices, the 2020 (levelized) cost of
energy via utility-scale solar was roughly on par with the costs of utility-scale onshore wind.
By contrast, the costs of residential solar remained more than two times higher than utility
scale solar. While there are no quasi-experimental estimates of the impact of utility-scale solar,
we can return to our wind PTC setting and imagine a similar subsidy for solar installations.
Assuming the elasticity of solar installations is similar to historical wind PTC elasticities (-1.3),
we can use the utility-scale solar costs per kWh to estimate an MVPF. Here, one motivation
for assuming the -1.3 elasticity is similar for utility-scale wind and solar is that it captures a
structural user cost elasticity that is plausibly constant across investment types. Under that
assumptions, we find the MVPF of utility-scale solar subsidies would be 10.97, well above our
estimates for the wind PTC. Given this, a natural conclusion from our analysis is that subsidies
to utilities for either wind or solar have higher MVPFs than residential solar subsidies.
Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEVs) We next consider subsidies for hybrid electric vehicles
(HEVs). We use three estimates from two papers that evaluate the response of HEV purchases
51Ifthepreexistingsubsidywere0%,therewouldbenosuchfiscalexternality. Ifthepreexistingsubsidywere
the 30% rate implemented in the IRA, the fiscal externality would be $0.40.
28

to state and federal HEV subsidies (Beresteanu & Li 2011, Gallagher & Muehlegger 2011).52
We focus our discussion here on the Federal Income Tax Credit for Hybrid Vehicles evaluated
in Beresteanu & Li (2011), whose findings imply a price elasticity of -1.98.
As in the case of EV subsidies, we measure the environmental externalities from HEV
purchases by comparing HEVs to the counterfactual vehicles that subsidy recipients would
have purchased in the absence of the subsidy. We draw upon estimates from Muehlegger &
Rapson (2023), who show that the MPG of counterfactual vehicles is very close to the MPG
of HEVs: the implied fuel-economy gap was just 1.9 MPG in 2020. As a result, we estimate
that environmental damage reduction is less than $0.01 per dollar of mechanical subsidy. The
remaining components of the MVPF are also small, yielding an MVPF of 1.01. We find similar
results across the other two HEV studies we analyze, leading to a category average MVPF of
1.01.53 The small environmental benefits and MVPF values near 1 imply that HEV subsidies
are primarily transfers to consumers already intending to purchase an HEV.
Vehicle Retirement Next, we consider subsidies encouraging the retirement of old vehicles.
So-called “cash for clunkers” policies provide subsidies to those retiring old cars conditional
on purchasing new cars that satisfy certain standards (e.g., fuel economy requirements). We
consider three evaluations of such policies (Li et al. 2013, Hoekstra et al. 2017, Sandler 2012).
We focus here on Li et al. (2013), who evaluate the federal cash for clunkers program in 2009.
They find that the subsidy caused individuals to accelerate their purchase by several months
and switch to a slightly more fuel-e cient vehicle.
By construction, a $1 larger subsidy generates $1 in benefits to those who were going
to retire their vehicle anyway. We estimate that the re-timing of vehicle purchases and the
increase in fuel e ciency of the new cars leads to a social willingness to pay of $0.27 for global
environmental benefits and $0.02 for local environmental benefits. That calculation, however,
holds driving behavior constant. So, next, we account for the fact that shifting to a more fuel
e cient vehicle reduces the marginal cost of driving, potentially increasing total vehicle miles
traveled. We use estimates from Small & Van Dender (2007) and show that this rebound e↵ect
reduces the net environmental benefits by $0.02. On the cost side, the shift toward more fuel
e cient vehicles generates a fiscal externality of $0.06 from lost gas tax revenue and corporate
tax revenue from gasoline producers. Combining these results yields an MVPF of 1.04.
52Wedrawtwoestimatesfrom(Gallagher&Muehlegger2011)becausetheydistinguishbetweenupfrontsales
tax waivers and ex-post income tax credits.
53Here, the small MPG di↵erence between the induced hybrid and the counterfactual vehicle means that the
MVPF is not very responsive to changes in the elasticity. This is particularly relevant as our estimates from
(Gallagher & Muehlegger 2011) have very large elasticities. They find an upfront subsidy has an elasticity of
-6.92 and an ex-post tax credit has an elasticity of -0.43. These papers yield baseline MVPF estimates of 1.03
and 1.00, respectively. If we deviate from the counterfactual estimates in the literature and assume that HEVs
displace an average new car sold in 2020, the MVPF estimates for HEVs still fall in a relatively limited range.
Our category average assuming hybrids replace an average new car is 1.20. An elasticity of -1.98 yields 1.12
and our -6.92 elasticity from (Gallagher & Muehlegger 2011) still only yields an MVPF of 1.42.
29

The two other vehicle retirement policies in our sample have similar baseline MVPFs. We
find MVPFs of 1.07 using the behavioral response to the 2009 cash for clunkers program esti-
mated among consumers in Texas (Hoekstra et al. 2017) and 1.03 for the Bay Area Air Quality
Management District’s (BAAQMD) Vehicle Buy Back Program (Sandler 2012). Consequently,
the category average MVPF for vehicle retirement is 1.05, with individual policies ranging from
1.03 to 1.07. The MVPF near 1 means that, like HEV subsidies, vehicle retirement subsidies
are primarily transfers to people who would have retired their vehicle anyway.
While most of our analysis focuses on harmonized 2020 MVPF estimates, vehicle retirement
is a unique case where the distinction between in-context and 2020 estimates has a meaningful
impact on the results. In particular, the BAAQMD Vehicle Buy Back Program implemented in
1996wasdesignedtoencouragetheretirementofvehiclesthatwere26+yearsoldatthetime. A
26-year-old vehicle in 1996 (one produced in 1970) produced far more emissions than a 26-year-
old vehicle did in 2020. Using historical estimates of vehicle fleet emissions, we estimate that
each $1 in subsidy spending in 1996 produced $2.85 in local environmental benefits and $0.91
in global environmental benefits, leading to an in-context MVPF for BAAQMD of 2.38. Put
simply, paying people to retire their 1970 Chevy had much higher returns in 1996 than paying
people to retire their 1994 Toyota in 2020. Aside from this interesting case, the in-context and
2020 MVPF estimates are quite similar.
Weatherization We next consider weatherization assistance subsidies to improve home en-
ergy e ciency through better insulation, windows, lighting, and other energy-intensive aspects
of the home. Our sample includes five di↵erent weatherization policies (Christensen, Francisco
& Myers 2023, Fowlie et al. 2018, Hancevic & Sandoval 2022, Liang et al. 2018, Allcott &
Greenstone 2024). We focus our discussion here on the Weatherization Assistance Program
in Michigan studied by Fowlie et al. (2018). The program used an encouragement design to
increase take-up of home weatherization and studied the impact of weatherization on home
energy costs.
Measuring WTP of weatherization is more di cult than for price subsidies because the pa-
pers studying their e↵ects generally focus on measuring the energy use impacts of the subsidies
without measuring the fraction of inframarginal beneficiaries – those who would have weather-
ized anyway. Consequently, when constructing our measure of WTP, we explore the robustness
of our estimates to variations in this fraction. By definition, this fraction must be between
0 and 100%. We make a baseline assumption that 50% of those receiving the weatherization
benefits are inframarginal.
Those inframarginal individuals value the weatherization subsidy dollar-for-dollar while
marginal individuals also have a valuation for the subsidy which must fall between 0 and
$1. When examining a discrete bundle of weatherization services, we do not know whether it
was the first or last dollar of the policy that induced their response. If it was the first dollar,
then they would value roughly the entirety of the transfer at its cost. If it were the last dol-
30

lar, then they would have a near-zero valuation of the subsidy. Following the classic triangle
approximation to measuring deadweight loss in Harberger (1964) (and the approach taken in
Hendren & Sprung-Keyser (2020)), we assume that this latent value of the subsidy varies uni-
formly in the population (i.e., a linear demand curve). This suggests these marginal individuals
value the subsidy at 50% of its value.54 Putting together the valuations among marginal and
non-marginal individuals, every $1 in initial spending on weatherization generates a benefit of
$0.75 to those who take up the benefits.
In addition to the transfer benefits of weatherization our WTP also includes environmental
benefits to society. The estimates of reduced energy consumption in Fowlie et al. (2018) imply a
local environmental benefit of $0.01 and a global environmental benefit of $0.30. The reduction
in electricity demand caused by the program also induces a rebound e↵ect which we estimate
to be -$0.05, so that the total environmental benefit is $0.27. Overall, our analysis suggests an
MVPF of 0.92.
As noted above, this MVPF calculation requires taking stances on the fraction of benefi-
ciaries that are marginal and the valuation of benefits among those marginal individuals. An
attractive alternative approach is taken by Allcott & Greenstone (2024), who study a weather-
izationpolicyinWisconsin. Theycombineexperimentalandobservationalvariationtoestimate
a demand model that yields valuations of the weatherization program that imply an in-context
MVPF of 0.93. Using our damage models to harmonize with our other estimates replicates the
0.93 in-context and produces an MVPF of 0.92 in the baseline 2020 specification.
Taking an average across all of the weatherization policies, we obtain a category average
MVPF of 0.98.55 These estimates assumes individuals are aware of the energy benefits of
weatherization so they do not incorporate private energy savings as an additional benefit in
the willingness to pay. The idea is that these individuals may value the energy savings, but
the benefit of these savings are weighed against other considerations, such as the hassle cost of
a construction project in their home. The logic of optimization tells us that the value of the
policy to individuals is bounded by the size of the transfer, and it would be double counting
to incorporate energy savings as a benefit on top of the transfer benefit of the program. It is,
of course, possible that individuals were not aware of the cost savings they would receive from
weatherization. If this were the case, then these benefits might reflect an “internality.”56 It
would then be natural for the marginal individuals to value the energy savings as an additional
benefit. Including the energy savings as an additional component of the benefits of the policy
54We note that one could take alternative demand parameterizations to think about bounds on these magni-
tudes, as in Kang & Vasserman (2022).
55While most of these underlying estimates require assumptions about the fraction of recipients that are
inframarginal, we find the estimate is robust to reasonable variations in this assumption. This is because the
externality benefits are relatively similar to the transfer benefits of the policy. With an assumed marginal
fraction of 0% the MVPF is 1 by construction and with an assumed marginal fraction of 100% the category
average MVPF is 0.97.
56We note that Allcott & Greenstone (2024) find that only 68% of the projected energy savings are actually
realized. As they explain, this may lead individuals to experience a welfare loss if their expenditures yield
lower-than-expected benefits.
31

yields a category average MVPF of 1.37. Regardless of whether individuals were aware of the
energy savings provided by weatherization, these subsidies do not generate large environmental
benefits. They are instead best thought of primarily as a transfer to those weatherizing their
homes.
ApplianceRebates Wenextconsidersubsidiesdesignedtoencouragethepurchaseofenergy-
e cient appliances, such as dishwashers, refrigerators, and stoves. We discuss here estimates
from Houde & Aldy (2017), which studies energy e ciency rebates for clothes washers, dish-
washers, and refrigerators as implemented in 2009. For subsidies for clothes washers, they
estimate that roughly 90.5% of those receiving the subsidy are inframarginal – they would have
purchased the energy-e cient product in the absence of the subsidy. These individuals value
their subsidy dollar for dollar. For the remaining 9.5%, we once again invoke the Harberger
approximation, assuming a linear demand curve so that 50% of the transfer is valued. Summing
across marginal and inframarginal beneficiaries yields a total of $0.95 in transfer benefits per
dollar of subsidy. Turning to environmental benefits, the induced purchases of more e cient
clothes washers generate a global environmental benefit of $0.55 and a local benefit of $0.08.
This is partially o↵set by global and local rebound e↵ects of -$0.11 and -$0.02, respectively.
The reduction in electricity usage also leads to lost profits for utility companies of $0.04 per
dollar of subsidy. Combining these results leads to an MVPF of clothes washer subsidies of
1.41.57 This MVPF is the highest of the three types of subsidies studied in Houde & Aldy
(2017). We find MVPFs of 1.13 and 1.04 for dishwasher and refrigerator subsidies, respectively.
When we combine these estimates with those of the five other appliance rebates estimates in
our sample, we find a category average MVPF of 1.16. As is the case with many of the subsidies
in our sample, the environmental benefits of appliance rebates are limited and these policies
are primarily transfers to those who would have purchased these appliances anyway.
Other Subsidies Finally, we consider two other subsidy policies that do not neatly fit into
our categorization above. The first is the CA electricity rebate, which provided consumers with
a 20% discount on their electricity bill if they reduced consumption by 20% relative to their
energy consumption the previous summer. Ito (2015) finds that many consumers who received
the transfer would have lowered their consumption anyway in the absence of the transfer. Using
those estimates, we value the transfer at $0.88 per dollar of subsidy.58 That said, the policy
does lead to a large energy reduction, resulting in global environmental benefits of $2.09 and
local benefits of $0.30 when evaluated in our 2020 baseline context. These e↵ects are partially
o↵set by global and local rebound e↵ects of $0.41 and $0.06. The reduction in electricity usage
57If we were to assume that marginal individuals were not ex-ante aware of the energy savings benefits of the
policy, wewouldwanttoaddthosebenefitsintothewillingnesstopay. ThatwouldincreasetheMVPFto1.97.
58Thepaperdoesnotdirectlyreportthefractionofindividualsinthecontrolgroupwholoweredtheirenergy
usage by 20%. It does, however, report that there was no meaningful reduction in energy usage in the coastal
regionwhere88%ofthepaymentsweremade. TheMVPFestimatesreportedherearenotsensitivetovariation
in this assumption because the paper reports the total energy reduction among all treated individuals.
32

leads to lost profits of $0.13, so that the net WTP is $2.67. Accounting for the program’s cost,
administrative costs, and lost revenue from utilities ($0.07) leads to an MVPF of 2.57.59 While
this MVPF is quite large as compared to the others in our sample, we caution that a policy like
this one might not be easily implementable because it conditions future prices on past behavior.
If consumers knew that future prices would be reduced if they consume more energy today, they
might increase their energy consumption today in order to qualify for greater discounts in the
future. That anticipatory response would reduce the policy’s e↵ectiveness.
The second policy in this category is a US-based Payments for Ecosystem services policy
studied by Aspelund & Russo (2024). The authors use a regression discontinuity design to
estimate the e↵ect of the policy on land conservation. They find that 79% of land receiving
conservation payments would have been conserved in the absence of the policy. That yields a
transfer value of $0.89, when applying a Harberger approximation to the marginal recipients.
FollowingtheauthorsandusingestimatesfromtheUSDAonthecarbonabatedbytheprogram,
we estimate global environmental benefits of $0.92. The accompanying local benefits, including
reduced nitrous oxide released from decreasing fertilizer use, are $0.55. This yields an MVPF
of 2.41.
Summary of MVPFs for Subsidies Figure 4 presents the baseline MVPF estimates for
each of the subsidies in our sample. Following Hendren & Sprung-Keyser (2020), we also report
“category average” MVPFs. These are constructed by considering $1 in initial program costs
and splitting those costs evenly over all the policies in a category. This means the category
average MVPF equals the ratio of the average WTP and the average net cost of each policy in
the category. The shaded blue regions report 95% confidence intervals for the category average
MVPF derived from a parametric bootstrap of the underlying causal estimates from each pol-
icy.60 The main lesson from this analysis is that subsidies for investments that directly displace
the dirty production of electricity—namely, wind PTCs and residential solar subsidies—have
the highest MVPFs. In particular, production tax credits for firms that produce wind energy
have the highest MVPFs, generally exceeding 5. Subsidies to individuals who install residential
solar panels also have high MVPFs exceeding 3. By contrast, EV subsidies have MVPFs around
1.45. All other subsidies tend to have smaller MVPFs, with values around 1 0.2.
±
These results suggests the potential for meaningful welfare gains if climate spending is
focused on policies that displace the production of dirty electricity. For example, every dollar
of expanded spending on wind PTCs (with MVPFs above 5) financed by less spending on EV
59Interestingly,themagnitudeofthisMVPFisheavilydeterminedbythecontextinwhichitisanalyzed. We
report this MVPF using the national grid from 2020. If we re-analyze the policy using California’s grid from
2005, the MVPF falls to 1.00. This is because producers’ WTP rises in-context and because the CA grid in
2005 was cleaner than the national grid today.
60Appendix Table 3 provides measures of the confidence intervals for each policy in our sample. For a small
number of policies, we are not able to obtain estimates of the underlying sampling uncertainty. We report the
category average both for the full sample and the subset of policies for which we obtain sampling uncertainty
estimates, and we broadly find similar results.
33

subsidies (with MVPFs around 1.5) would deliver $3.50 in net benefits to society. Applying
equation (5), this reallocation of spending would increase social welfare as long as social welfare
weights on the beneficiaries of the EV subsidy (mostly EV buyers themselves) is no more than
three times larger (5/1.5) than the social welfare weight on wind PTC beneficiaries (e.g., utility
companies and future environmental beneficiaries).
This relative ordering of subsidies (i.e., the higher MVPFs for wind PTCs and residential
solar) remains true under a wide range of specifications. For example, Figure 5 repeats our
analysis from Figure 4 using a lower social cost of carbon of $76 (with a 2.5% discount rate)
and higher social cost of carbon of $337 (with a 1.5% discount rate). The relative ordering of
categories is similar, although a higher (lower) SCC accentuates (attenuates) the MVPF values
for the policies that substantially reduce greenhouse gas emissions.61
We also consider a number of other sensitivity tests to explore robustness of our main
conclusions. Appendix Table 6 shows the results when omitting any e↵ects on firm profits.
Appendix Table 7 shows the results when including measures of private energy savings in will-
ingnesstopay. AppendixTable8showstheresultswithout learning-by-doinge↵ects. Ineach of
these cases, the relative ordering of policies remains largely una↵ected. We note, however, that
the MVPFs of EVs and residential solar are buoyed by learning-by-doing e↵ects.62 Without
learning-by-doing, the values for EVs fall from 1.45 to 0.96, and the values for residential solar
fall from 3.86 to 1.45. By contrast, even without learning by doing, subsidies for utility-scale
wind produce relatively high MVPFs, with a category average of 3.85. Appendix Figure 5
shows, in blue bars, how the MVPF changes when only considering benefits to US residents
and ignoring the benefits to the rest of the world. While the relative ordering again remains un-
changed, the MVPF values decrease substantially. The wind and solar categories have MVPFs
of 1.89 and 1.18 while other categories are often below 1. This is because only 13.1% of the
global externality benefits are estimated to flow to US citizens and so the numerator of the
MVPF falls in cases where the are meaningful global environmental benefits.
Our primary estimates report the MVPF for a marginal change in subsidies relative to 2020
subsidy levels. We also explore the robustness of our results to non-marginal changes in subsidy
levels. For example, in the case of residential solar subsidies, our baseline analysis examines a
marginal change relative to 26% subsidy in place in 2020. We can consider instead the policy
change equal in magnitude to the change induced by Inflation Reduction Act (IRA), which
prevented the expiration of residential solar subsidies and set the subsidy rate to 30%. If we
examine the MVPF of a subsidy increase from 0% to 30%, we get an MVPF of 4.43, relatively
close but slightly above our marginal category average of 3.86. We can repeat the same exercise
for the wind PTC, examining the e↵ect of increasing the PTC from 0 to 2.6 cents per kWh.
That policy change results in an MVPF of 5.80 as compared to our baseline marginal MVPF
estimate of 5.87. This once again contrasts with lower MVPFs for EV subsidies. A $7500
61Appendix Tables 4 and 5 report the estimates for all individual policies for the SCC of $76 and $337.
62Recall that it would be appropriate to omit these e↵ects if one does not believe the empirical observed
relationship between prices and historical quantities does not reflect spillover externalities.
34

EV subsidy has an average MVPF of 1.23, slightly lower than the MVPF of 1.45 for a $1
subsidy.63 This analysis of non-marginal policy changes once again reinforces our conclusion
about climate subsidies: those that directly displace the dirty production of electricity have the
highest MVPFs.
5 Nudges and Marketing
We next consider policies that employ nudges or marketing strategies to lower carbon emissions
by reducing residential energy consumption. Unlike subsidies, which provide direct financial
incentives, these policies disseminate information or change choice architecture to encourage
individuals to change energy usage or product purchases.
The Home Energy Report (HER) designed by Opower (now Oracle) is perhaps the most
well-studied environmental nudge. The HER provides information on how to be more energy
e cient in the home and often includes an element of social pressure (e.g., comparisons of a
household’s energy use with 100 similar neighbors). There have been over 200 rigorous RCTs
showing the causal impact of such nudges on energy demand in the United States and around
the world (Allcott 2011). Here, we show how to translate these estimates into the MVPF of
these nudges using estimates from Allcott (2011) of the national average treatment e↵ect of
HERs aimed at reducing electricity use. We then consider the e↵ects of nudges in di↵erent
regions using 166 treatment e↵ect estimates obtained from Opower.
We begin with the WTP for the Opower nudge. In our baseline specification, we assume
people were close to indi↵erent about their change in energy usage, which implies that the value
of the nudge to individuals is roughly zero. In particular, they do not place any additional valu-
ation on private energy savings. They also don’t have any value of shame or pride (independent
on any change on demand) or value of information from the nudges. We acknowledge these
sources of WTP may be important and so assess the robustness to including such estimates
below (Allcott & Kessler 2019, Butera et al. 2022, List et al. 2023).64
HERs targeting electricity usage cause a reduction in consumption, which has an impact on
environmental damages and utility company profits. Combining these treatment e↵ects with
the externality from electricity production in the US, we estimate that every $1 invested in
these nudges leads to $3.87 in global environmental benefits and $0.44 in local environmental
benefits. These benefits are partially o↵set by rebound e↵ects of $0.76 and $0.09 due to the
increased energy prices that result from reduced demand. We also estimate that utility com-
panies experience a decrease in profits of $0.24 for each $1 spent on the Home Energy Report
63This category average non-marginal MVPF is slightly higher than the 1.15 we discuss above that uses
estimates from Muehlegger & Rapson (2022).
64For example, Allcott & Kessler (2019) suggest that individuals would be willing to pay on average about
half (49%) of the energy savings that they experience from the nudge. As a conservative approach, Appendix
Table 7 presents the results when we add in 100% of the energy savings, and shows that our conclusions remain
broadly similar.
35

(HER) nudge.
On the government cost side, we assume the government pays for the electricity HER and
thus include those administrative and logistical costs as a government cost.65 Government
revenue collected from utilities decreases by $0.13, but the long-run climate fiscal externality
saves the government $0.06. Combining the willingness to pay and government costs, we obtain
an MVPF of 3.01.
While this 3.01 estimate corresponds to an average electricity HER, it is important to note
that the MVPF varies considerably across regions of the US due to the di↵erences in the clean-
liness of the electricity grid. Figure 6 illustrates the MVPF for HER nudges across five US
regions where field experiments have been conducted and evaluated. The Mid-Atlantic, North-
west, and Midwest have high MVPFs with average values of 5.68, 5.50, and 3.76, respectively.
By contrast, in California and New England, the MVPFs are 0.52 and 0.24, respectively.66 In
New England and California the grid is su ciently clean such that the environmental benefits
are smaller and are roughly o↵set by the loss of profits to the utility companies.67,68 We also
note the value of nudges depends heavily on the global externalities from the grid, but the
regional patterns we observe are robust to those SCC variables. At an SCC of $76 rather than
$193, the category average MVPF falls from 3.01 to 1.34. In that case, regions with dirty grids
have MVPFs in the 1.92 to 2.76 range while regions cleaner grids have MVPFs near 0.
While we find large MVPFs for nudges to reduce electricity consumption, we find much
smaller MVPFs for nudges to reduce natural gas consumption. On average HERs targeted at
natural gas usage have an MVPF of 0.45. This lower MVPF is partially driven by the fact
that nudges to reduce natural gas consumption have smaller treatment e↵ects: the average
natural gas nudge reduces consumption by 0.14% while the average electricity nudge reduces
consumption by 0.26%. In addition, the environmental benefits are smaller than the associated
benefits of reducing electricity consumption in areas with dirty grids.
In addition to examining nudges aimed at reducing overall energy consumption, we also
evaluate the MVPF of nudges targeting energy usage reduction during peak load times. As the
65This appears to be a reasonable approximation of what happens in practice, but it is also true that energy
companies pay for nudges. This means that we measure the MVPF of the nudge as if the government were to
enact the policy or pay utilities to enact the policy.
66It is possible that the e↵ects of the nudge persist beyond the measured time periods in these studies.
However, the MVPFs for CA and New England remain at 0.72 and 0.36 even if we assume that half of the
treatment e↵ects persist for two years after the nudge (Brandon et al. 2017, Allcott & Rogers 2014).
67Excludingthelossinfirmprofits,theMVPFforCAandNewEnglandincreaseto2.02and0.96,respectively.
They continue, however, to be substantially smaller than the MVPFs in the three regions with dirtier grids:
5.81 (Mid-Atlantic), 5.50 (Northwest), 3.86 (Midwest). We note that this dependence of the welfare e↵ects on
firm profits is similar to the argument in Buchanan (1969), who considers welfare with corrective taxes under
competition and monopoly.
68Here, the Northwest is categorized as a dirty electric grid despite the substantial levels of hydroelectric
powerintheregion. Thisisduetoboth(i)thehighlevelofmarginalemissionsestimatedintheAVERTmodel
(as distinct from average emissions) and (ii) the nature of the regional aggregation used in the AVERT model
of marginal emissions. The northwest region includes states with very high levels of grid emissions, such as
Utah. OmittingtheNorthwestfromouranalysisdoesnotchangethebroadtrajectoryofourfindingsregarding
regional variation in nudge MVPFs.
36

grid increasingly relies on wind and solar power, reducing energy demand during periods when
it is not sunny or windy becomes more valuable. The primary benefit of interventions focused
on demand flexibility is not merely CO reduction, but the ability to avoid costly blackouts or
2
expensive marginal generation caused by the intermittency of renewable energy sources. An
example of such nudges is the peak energy report, which informs consumers of their energy
consumption during peak periods compared to their neighbors (Brandon et al. 2019). The
field experiment showed the treatment led to a 4% reduction in energy use during peak hours.
Constructing the MVPF requires placing a social value on this reduction in peak energy use.
Here, we focus on the extent to which the marginal cost of peak production exceeds the price.
We consider marginal costs ranging from ranging from 500/MWh to 1000/MWh and find
associated MVPFs from 0.70 to 1.60.69 If the demand reduction also decreased the frequency
and/or duration of blackouts, these MVPF estimates could rise as high as 5.30.70
In addition to energy reports, we study marketing strategies and information treatments
designed to encourage adoption of clean technologies and reduce electricity usage. For example,
theSolarizeprogramsoughttoincreaseresidentialsolarinstallationsbyprovidingmunicipalities
with a designated solar installer, group pricing, and an informational campaign led by volunteer
ambassadors over the course of 20 weeks. Translating estimates of the impact of this program
from Gillingham & Bollinger (2021), we estimate an MVPF of 1.81.71
By contrast, we find lower MVPFs when considering producer side marketing policies fo-
cused on weatherization. Christensen, Francisco & Myers 2023 study the provision of bonus
incentives that provide payments to installers based on the energy savings that result from
their installations. Encouraging installers to improve weatherization techniques modestly el-
evates the MVPF of existing weatherization subsidies. The MVPF rises from 0.98 without a
bonus to 1.06-1.07 with a bonus, depending on the magnitude of the incentive. This policy has
a relatively low MVPF not because the bonuses are ine↵ective per se but rather because the
baseline weatherization subsidy results in small energy reductions relative to its baseline cost.
This helps to explain the divergence with the larger MVPF for the Solarize program discussed
above. Both policies encouraged take-up, but, in the context of residential solar, the induced
take-up generates meaningful environmental benefits per dollar of government costs.
Summary of MVPFs for Nudges and Marketing We find that nudges to reduce elec-
tricity consumption can yield high MVPFs — on average exceeding 1.5 in our 2020 baseline
69These values are consistent with peak electricity production costs in (CAISO 2021).
70Forthiscalculation,weassumethatthecausalreductioninenergyusefromthetreatmentwouldbeutilized
byhouseholdsthatwouldotherwiseexperienceablackoutinthecounterfactualscenario. Inordertoestimatethe
valueofavoidingablackout, weusethevalueoflostload(VOLL)of$4,300perMWh(Brown&Muehlenbachs
2024). We recognize that the VOLL may vary across di↵erent populations, times, and locations (Borenstein
et al. 2023).
71Solarize uses a fairly unique peer marketing strategy in order to achieve its strong results. The general-
izability of those findings depends heavily on the generalizability of the peer e↵ects observed in the Solarize
context.
37

specification. Crucially, we find that these MVPFs vary significantly across regions of the US.
Regions characterized by a less clean energy grid have higher MVPFs. By contrast, in regions
with cleaner grids such as California and New England, the MVPF values of HER nudges are
below 1. This highlights the importance of the environmental context in space and time when
evaluating the welfare impact of a nudge. We also find that nudges aimed at reducing natural
gas consumption have lower MVPFs than those targeting electricity consumption due to the
smaller treatment e↵ects and lower environmental damages relative to electricity production.
Finally, marketingstrategiescanalsoincreasetheMVPF,butonlywhentargetinginterventions
that generate large environmental benefits.
6 Revenue Raisers
An alternative approach to address greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions is to tax the sources of
thoseemissions. SuchpoliciescanreduceGHGemissionswhilealsoraisinggovernmentrevenue.
Forrevenue-raisingpolicies, theMVPFmeasuresthewelfareburden imposed on individualsper
dollar of government revenue raised. This means that, all else equal, lower MVPFs correspond
to better methods of raising revenue. For a point of reference, lump-sum taxes have an MVPF
of1becausetheyimpose$1inwelfarecostpereachdollarofrevenueraised. Theyareatransfer
from individuals to the government. If a revenue-raising policy generates some form of societal
benefit (e.g., from reducing CO ), these can o↵set some of the burden and generate an MVPF
2
below 1. In contrast, behavioral changes induced by taxes can lead to behavioral responses
that reduce the revenue raised, which can increase the MVPF above 1. The key advantage of
the MVPF framework is that we can use equation (5) to compare these taxes to other methods
of raising revenue, such as reductions in spending on subsidies or increases in income taxes.
Here, we estimate MVPFs for two types of revenue-raising policies: taxes and cap-and-trade
policies. We also show how to place our MVPF estimates in the context of welfare estimates
of regulation such as CAFE standards.
6.1 Taxes
A positive tax is just a negative subsidy. So, returning to equation 9 and replacing ⌧ with ⌧
 
yields the MVPF for a change in a tax, ⌧ , under perfect competition:
1 ✏V
MVPF =   p (25)
1+✏⌧
p
where ✏ is once again the price elasticity of demand and V is the externality per unit of the
good consumed. Taxes are often applied to goods (e.g., gasoline) that yield environmental
harms, V < 0. In the case of taxes on polluting goods, the numerator of the MVPF reflects two
countervailing forces. On the one hand, each dollar of tax imposes a $1 of burden on the taxed
38

individuals. On the other hand, the behavioral response to the tax changes consumption of the
taxed good, x, generating environmental gains that partially o↵set the burden of the tax, ✏V .
p
That change in consumption is also reflected in the denominator of the MVPF because changes
in consumption impact tax revenue and diminish the net revenue raised from the tax, ✏⌧. In
p
the case of a Pigouvian tax, where ⌧ = V, the MVPF is 1. If the tax is below (above) the
 
Pigouvian level, the MVPF of the tax will fall below (above) 1. While equation (25) provides
a stylized example of the MVPF for a gasoline tax, we use an extended version below that
includes externalities from imperfect competition and learning-by-doing e↵ects (e.g., gas taxes
induce the adoption of EVs, generating learning-by-doing).
We construct 12 MVPFs for gasoline taxes using estimates of the response of gasoline
consumption to price and tax changes. These estimates imply price elasticities that range from
-0.04 (Hughes et al. 2008) to -0.46 (Davis & Kilian 2011). We begin with an illustration of the
construction of these MVPFs using the elasticity estimate from Small & Van Dender (2007)
who find a price elasticity of -0.33. Figure 7 presents the components of WTP and net cost
for this specification. We report these components for the gas tax using our baseline (2020)
externalities and prices. Consistent with most existing literature, we assume that the gas tax is
fully passed through to consumers. A $1 increase in the gas tax leads to a WTP of consumers
of $1 to avoid the tax increase (Marion & Muehlegger 2011). We estimate that the reduced
driving due to the tax leads to global benefits of $0.27, local pollution benefits of $0.03, and
local benefits from reduced accidents and congestion of $0.21.
Recent work suggests that gasoline prices can have a causal e↵ect on EV adoption (Bushnell
et al. 2022). Motivated by this, we use Slutsky symmetry to assess the potential impact of this
substitution on our MVPF estimates. We translate the own-price elasticity of EV purchases
of -2.1 (Muehlegger & Rapson 2022) into a cross-price elasticity between the price of gasoline
and EV demand of 0.22.72 These EV purchases generate $0.0008 in combined global and local
damages from electricity generation. They also generate learning-by-doing benefits of $0.002
from reduced future EV prices and $0.0002 from future environmental benefits.73
Lastly, we incorporate the profit impacts from reduced gasoline demand. We estimate this
leads to a $0.07 WTP by firms to avoid the tax. Gasoline producers have a positive WTP to
avoid the tax, whereas utility companies benefit from the substitution toward EVs. On the
cost side, the reduction in demand also leads to lost corporate and gas tax revenue of $0.09.74
The US government also raises $0.01 in future revenue by abating greenhouse gases today.
Combining our WTPs and cost implies an MVPF of 0.60. A dollar of government revenue
72Under Slutksy symmetry, in combination with the assumption of no change in overall car demand (just
shifting between EVs and ICE vehicles), the cross-price elasticity is given by the own-price elasticity multiplied
by the ratio of the present discounted value of operating costs of a gasoline powered car relative to the price of
an EV. See Appendix E.10 for our derivation.
73We also account for utilities’ WTP for increased electricity usage by EVs as well as accompanying fiscal
externalities associated with EV adoption. These e↵ects are negligible.
74Consistent with the findings in West & Williams (2007) that gasoline is a relative complement to leisure
rather than labor, we exclude any labor income related fiscal externality.
39

raised leads to a welfare cost of $0.60 on individuals.
Figure 8 presents the MVPF estimates for the full set of gasoline studies in our main
sample. We find MVPFs ranging from 0.44 to 0.95, with a category average of 0.67.75 We also
construct MVPF estimates for taxes on diesel and jet fuel and find similarly low MVPFs with
values around 0.8. A full description of those calculations can be found in Appendix E.11.76 In
each of these cases, the MVPF falls below 1 because the externalities avoided (environmental,
congestion, or accidents) are larger than the fiscal externality induced by the policy.
On the whole, the results suggest fuel taxes raise revenue at a relatively low welfare cost.
The MVPFs of these revenue raisers are well below the MVPF of changes to the income tax,
which range from 1 to 2 depending on the income level of the taxed individuals (Hendren 2020,
Hendren & Sprung-Keyser 2020). The MVPFs of fuel taxes are even below 1, the MVPF of a
non-distortionary lump sum tax. Returning to equation (5), we can use the MVPFs to make
statements about the welfare e↵ects of budget neutral policy experiments. For example, we can
directly compare an MVPF of .6 for gasoline taxes with an MVPF of 1.1 for income taxes on
low-income earners. If society places equal weight on the individuals impacted by each policy,
then every dollar of revenue shifted from income taxes to gasoline taxes generates 50 cents in
additional welfare.77 If, by contrast, a decision-maker would prefer the status quo, it implies
they must place a higher welfare weight on drivers relative to an average low-income individual.
While the analysis here has focused on the impact of tax instruments, it is important to
acknowledge that governments may also use regulatory policy to achieve the same ends. For
example, Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards require automakers to meet
certain mile per gallon standards for the fleet of vehicles they sell in the US. The MVPF
approachisdesignedtoexaminethewelfareconsequencesofgovernmentspendingortaxpolicies
where the primary tradeo↵ is between the government budget and individuals in the economy.
In contrast, for regulatory policies such CAFE the primary tradeo↵ is between di↵erent groups
of individuals (e.g., consumers paying higher prices versus other individuals benefiting from
a cleaner environment). The incidence of on the government budget is non-existent or small.
Therefore, an in-depth exploration of regulatory policies is beyond the scope of our analysis.
That said, Appendix G shows that one can use the MVPF framework to compare the welfare
consequences of regulations to typical tax and spend instruments. In particular, we ask whether
the welfare consequences of a regulation can be replicated using a combination of taxes and
transfers. Appendix Figure 6, for example, seeks to replicate the benefits o↵ered by CAFE with
a mix of gas taxes and income tax changes. We show that gasoline taxes combined with feasible
75Even when omitting externality benefits that flow to residents outside the US, the MVPF still falls below
1 with a category average of 0.89.
76DieseltaxeshaveahigherMVPFthangastaxesbecausedieseldemandislesselasticthangasolinedemand.
This increases the MVPF, despite the fact that diesel vehicles impose a larger per-gallon externality than gas-
powered vehicles. The jet fuel tax has a higher MVPF than gas taxes due to fewer local externalities.
77Even ignoring environmental benefits and focusing solely on accidents and congestion, gas taxes have an
MVPF of 0.95, which continues to be lower than the MVPFs identified for tax changes at any point across the
income distribution (Hendren 2020).
40

income tax modifications can replicate CAFE’s impact on the environment, producers, and
consumers while also generating roughly $1 in additional government revenue.78 The key reason
for the relative superiority of the tax instruments is that they generate reductions in driving,
inducing additional benefits from reduced accidents and congestion. We conduct a similar
exercise in Appendix G showing that wind subsidies combined with income tax modifications
deliver welfare gains that are superior to Renewable Portfolio Standards (RPS) regulations.
6.2 Cap and Trade
Cap and trade systems are a common policy tool used to limit emissions. They impose quantity
limitsonemissionsandletfirmstradetherightstosuchemissions. Weevaluatetwocaseswhere
cap and trade has been used in the US: the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) in the
Northeastandmid-Atlantic,andtheCaliforniaCap-and-TradeProgram. Wealsobrieflydiscuss
the European Emissions Trading System (ETS) to provide an additional point of comparison.
We can interpret changes in the number of permits in a cap and trade system in a manner
similar to a change in the tax rate on polluting goods. The key distinction is that taxes change
prices while cap and trade uses permits to directly change quantities. This means that there
is a close analogy between the MVPF formula for changes in the number of permits in a cap
and trade system and the MVPF formula for taxes on a polluting good, such as the gasoline
tax outlined in equation (25).79
Formally, we construct the MVPF of cap and trade by considering a change in the number
of permits sold at auction. Let q denote the number of permits issued. Assume that one fewer
permit leads to (1 L) reductions in emissions, where L is the “leakage” of emissions into areas
 
not captured by the cap and trade program. Following equation (25), and multiplying through
by qdp/dq, we can write the MVPF of changing the number of auctioned permits as
qdp +V(1 L)
MVPF =   dq   . (28)
qdp p
  dq  
78Here, we focus on replicating the incidence across broad groups within society such as consumers or pro-
ducers. We focus, for example, on o↵setting producer losses with high income tax cuts, acknowledging that the
beneficiaries of those tax cuts may not be the same firms that bore the burden of lost profits due to the CAFE
standards.
79To see this, note that
qdp +V(1 L)
MVPF =   dq   (26)
qdp +p
  dq
1 dqpV(1 L)
=   dpq   (27)
1 dqp
  dpq
which is equivalent to equation (25) noting that ✏=(dq/dp)(p/q) and that the “tax” on permits applied in the
denominator is 100% since they are owned by the government.
41

The first term is the firms’ willingness to pay to avoid the increase in permit prices, which stem
from the reduction in permit supply. This is o↵set by the environmental damages avoided,
V(1 L), due to a one-unit change in the number of permits auctioned. On the cost side, the
 
government receives the mechanical revenue from the higher prices, qdp/dq > 0, but also loses
 
p in revenue from the forgone permit no longer auctioned.80
We begin with the in-context estimates of the e↵ect of RGGI on greenhouse gas emissions
using results from Chan & Morrow (2019). Between 2009 and 2016, there were 816.2 million
permits auctioned (per short ton of CO ), at an average clearing price of $3.19 (in 2016 dollars).
2
The authors estimate that RGGI reduced 22 million short tons of CO during this period. This
2
implies that a one unit reduction in the quantity of permits sold led to a $1.45 10 7 dollar
 
⇥
increaseinthepermitprice, ordp/dq = 1.45 10 7. ThissuggeststhatifRGGIhadauctioned
 
  ⇥
one fewer permit between 2009 and 2016, it would have lost $3.19 from the price of the permit
but gained approximately dp/dq q = 1.45 81.62 = $118.48 in additional revenue from higher
  ⇤ ⇤
permit prices.81
Higher prices impose a cost on firms purchasing permits, which totals to $118.48. These
higher prices will cause some firms to opt not to purchase permits and instead reduce their
emissions. While the envelope theorem suggests these profit maximizing firms are indi↵erent
between buying a permit and reducing emissions, the emissions reductions generate environ-
mental externalities. The environmental benefit of releasing 1 L = 0.49 fewer short tons
 
of CO in 2016 is $65.20. Adding the reduction in local pollutants SO and NO yields an
2 2 X
additional gain of $117.21.82 On net, these environmental benefits o↵set the cost to firms for a
net positive willingness to pay of $63.93. Raising revenue via a reduction in auctioned permits
as part of RGGI led to a net win for individuals and taxpayers.83
While our in-context estimates suggest RGGI led to significant benefits to taxpayers and
individuals in society, we caution that it is potentially di cult to extrapolate our in-context
estimates to a 2020 policy reform. This is because one needs to know the marginal abatement
cost curve in 2020 to understand how the number of permits would a↵ect its price. One
potential assumption is that it is stable over time – i.e., a 1 unit reduction in permits has the
same marginal impact on price as it did in the sample context over which it was estimated in
2009-2016. This is arguably a more aggressive assumption than the constant price elasticity
assumptions used in other MVPF calculations. That said, if we make such an assumption
80p does not enter the numerator because we assume we assume that firms are optimizing: the marginal firm
holding a permit has a marginal abatement cost equal to the permit price.
81We estimate a fiscal externality on the government budget to be $1.27, which suggests a net government
revenueof$116.56fromissuingonefewerpermit. MotivatedbytheevidenceinColmeretal.(2024)andMetcalf
& Stock (2023), we assume that cap and trade induces no reduction in the productive capacity of firms, and so
there is no additional corporate tax fiscal externality.
82Excludinglocaldamages,society’sWTPforpollutionreductionsisonly$65.20,implyinganMVPFof0.46.
83The positive net willingness to pay among individuals is the di↵erence between the environmental benefits
and the permit costs to firms. This corresponds to an increase in social welfare as long as one prefers $1.54
flowing to the beneficiaries of an improved environment over $1 in the hands of the firms paying the additional
permit costs.
42

regarding the marginal abatement curve, we can analyze the policy in 2020 and find that
reductions in cap and trade permits under RGGI produce net welfare gains for individuals
alongside an increase in government revenue. Greater restrictions in auctioned permits would
continuetoincreasegovernmentrevenue($123.01)whilealsodeliveringanetgaintoindividuals
in society, as the WTP for environmental damages ($210.33) outweighs each dollar firms pay
in permits ($127.78). It is, of course, not certain whether the marginal abatement cost curve
has been constant over time. The primary channel through which RGGI a↵ected emissions
was by inducing a switch from coal to natural gas. It is less clear whether the same set of
low cost substitution options continue to exist today after many coal plants have been retired.
Consequently, it may be that dp/dq is larger in 2020 than in the early 2010’s, leading to fewer
environmental benefits per dollar of cost imposed on those buying permits.
In addition to our analysis of RGGI, we also consider the MVPF of permits in the Cali-
fornia Cap-and-Trade Program using estimates from Hernandez-Cortes & Meng (2023). They
estimate the impact of the introduction of the cap and trade system on small and medium sized
manufacturing firms. A key challenge for our analysis is that existing data only track outcomes
for a sub-sample of firms subject to the cap and trade system. These firms make up just 5% of
GHG emissions subject to that system. As a conservative approach, we conduct our analysis
assuming the other 95% of the market does not generate any reductions in emissions. In this
case, it is straightforward to show that the MVPF would be around 0.95. In other words, a
decrease in auctioned permits would raise $1 in revenue at a welfare cost of $0.95 on society. If
we instead assumed that the other 95% of the regulated market had a similar response to the
observed 5%, this generates a much larger environmental benefit. The associated benefits are
su cient to o↵set the costs imposed on firms paying higher permit costs. This would suggest
that, like RGGI, the California Cap and Trade auctions raise revenue while also generating net
welfare gains to society.
While our primary focus here is on US climate policy, we also consider the largest cap and
trade system for CO in the world – the European Union’s Emissions Trading System (ETS).
2
Colmer et al. (2024) find that the introduction of ETS led to permit prices that stabilized
around $20 between 2005 and 2012 and ultimately generated a 15% reduction in emissions.
(They find no evidence of leakage.) Assuming a linear response to prices, the price of $19.90
generating a 15% reduction in emissions suggests firms are willing to pay $131.32 (q dp/dq) to
⇤
avoid a one ton reduction in the number of allocated permits. Comparing this to a historical
average SCC of $134.79 in this period, it suggests a net welfare gain of $3.47 ($134.79-$131.32).
On the cost side, we find that selling one fewer permit leads to a net revenue gain of $114.06.
Selling one fewer permit generates $114.06 in revenue and delivers $3.47 in net benefits to
individuals.84 This means that the evidence from ETS is consistent with the US evidence on
cap and trade: Reductions in permits have the potential to raise revenue while also providing
84We find a qualitatively similar conclusion when examining estimates on the impact of the ETS from Bayer
& Aklin (2020). Fewer ETS permits lead to $134.68 in net benefits to society while also generating $14.41 in
government revenue.
43

positive benefits to society.
Summary of Revenue-Raiser MVPFs The key lesson of this section is that taxes and
other restrictions on pollution-emitting activities o↵er paths to raising revenues at low welfare
costs. The MVPFs of these policies fall consistently below 1, suggesting they impose less than
$1 in burden for each dollar of revenue raised. This lies in contrast with other traditional
revenue raisers, such as increases in income tax rates, which consistently have MVPFs above 1.
Returning to equation (5), the results suggest a decision-maker setting tax policy would need to
have high implicit social welfare weights on individuals engaged in pollution-emitting activities
in order to justify status quo policies as optimal.85 For cap and trade, the results show that
there appear to be large quantities of emissions that can be reduced at relatively low cost - at
least in settings where these markets have been established. The presence of this low hanging
fruit means that small prices on carbon can lead to large reductions in emissions, generating a
win for taxpayers and a net win for individuals a↵ected by the policy. More broadly, our results
suggest that the presence of these large environmental externalities creates opportunities for
raising revenue at a low welfare cost relative to typical methods of raising revenue.
7 International Policies
Climate policies have international spillovers. The impacts of greenhouse gas emissions are felt
worldwide, regardless of the source of the emissions. This means that many of the beneficiaries
of US policies addressing climate change reside outside of the US, and that US residents are
the beneficiaries of climate policies enacted in other countries.
In this section, we draw upon an illustrative set of climate-focused policies implemented
in developing countries, largely by NGOs. We consider: to what extent is it beneficial to US
residents to pay for policies implemented in other countries? For each policy, we imagine that
the US government enacts the policy as a form of international aid. We consider 14 policies
spanning five categories: cookstoves, deforestation payments for ecosystem services, payments
to prevent rice field burning, wind subsidy o↵sets, and appliance and weatherization rebates.
We begin with subsidies for improved cookstoves in Kenya. Berkouwer & Dean (2022) find
that small subsidies for these cookstoves help to overcome individual credit constraints and
encourage the purchase of these appliances. When o↵ered a $30.37 subsidy (in 2020 dollars),
54.5% of individuals take up the cookstove. Nearly all of those beneficiaries are marginal, as
only 0.6% would have taken up the cookstove in the absence of the policy. The paper also
85Even ignoring environmental benefits and focusing solely on accidents and congestion, gas taxes have an
MVPF of 0.95, which is 14 percent lower than the MVPF around 1.1 typically observed for income tax changes
on low income individuals (Hendren 2020). This suggests an implicit welfare weight on drivers must be higher
than the weight on the earnings of a typical low-income individual in order to rationalize current tax rates as
optimal.
44

finds that each new cookstove reduces CO e by about 7 tons.86 This translates into $43.16
2
in global environmental benefits for each mechanical dollar of the subsidy. We combine those
global externality benefits with the transfer benefits of the subsidy and the value of private
energy savings. This yields a total willingness to pay of $50.82 for each mechanical dollar of
the subsidy.
Next, we consider the net cost of the policy. In our previous MVPF estimates, we considered
the impact of climate damages on the US government’s budget and noted such e↵ects were
minimal. Here, the impact of the policy on carbon emissions is su ciently large such that the
climate fiscal externality is quantitatively important. The precise value of that fiscal externality
depends on the model underlying the social cost of carbon. In our baseline specification, we
assume the US experiences 15% of the benefits of carbon abatement in proportion to its share of
global GDP. Across SCC models these benefits are typically a mix of mortality reductions and
productivity increases. We therefore assume 50% of the benefits are changes in productivity
and therefore taxed by the US government at a rate of 25.5% (the US tax to GDP ratio in
2020). Taking these estimates as given, implies that the the US government recoups $3.70 per
ton of CO and so for each mechanical dollar of subsidy, the net cost to the US government
2
would be just $0.157. When combined with the WTP for the policy, this yields an MVPF of 37
when only considering benefits to US residents and an MVPF of 323 when considering benefits
to individuals globally.
A key factor in this calculation is the extent to which reductions in global warming have
a positive impact on future US tax revenue (e.g., due. to higher future productivity). Models
that report the same social cost of carbon can generate di↵erent MVPFs because they di↵er in
the incidence on the US federal budget. For example, we could have assumed that the entirety
of the SCC was driven by changes in market productivity. This approach is motivated by a
literature estimating damages functions that relate carbon to GDP (Nath et al. 2024).87 In
this case, we find that the subsidy pays for itself. The net cost of policy is -$11.31 for each
dollar of mechanical subsidy (and the US-only MVPF is infinite). By contrast, other models
suggest that the incidence of emissions damages on the US taxpayer could be quite small. For
example, estimates from PAGE (Nordhaus 2017) suggest the US-incidence of carbon damages is
just 7%. Similarly, estimates from the GIVE model (Rennert et al. 2022) suggest that changes
in productivity are concentrated outside the US. If we drop the US-specific fiscal externality
to zero, the US-only MVPF falls to 4.91 and the MVPF including global benefits falls to
49.97. This highlights the importance of articulating incidence when constructing measures of
the social cost of carbon. While total damages estimates can be reported in GDP-equivalent
terms, the distinction between the sources of damages can meaningfully impact the welfare
86We note that these calculations assume that charcoal is derived entirely from non-renewable biomass. If
we were to use a fraction non-rewewable biomass of 45% estimated by the United Nations (2023), the carbon
reduction would be 1.67 tons.
87Some recent work has argued that carbon-driven GDP e↵ects imply a SCC in excess of $1,000 (Bilal &
K¨anzig 2024), but this fiscal externality is still important for far more modest estimates of the SCC when
greenhouse gas reductions are large.
45

consequences of a policy.
Figure 9 presents the MVPFs for the other international policies in our baseline sample.88
MVPFs using only US benefits are shown in blue and those including global benefits is shown
in orange. These estimates show the substantial variation in MVPF estimates both within
and across program categories. For example, the evidence from Berkouwer & Dean (2022)
di↵ers from the findings in prior work on cookstove subsidies. Hanna et al. (2016) found that
recipients simply did not use the cookstoves, which translates to an MVPF near zero. Similarly,
we find large variation in the returns to policies designed to prevent deforestation. We find that
payments to farmers in Sierra Leone toprevent deforestation yields an MVPFof 15.9 even when
only considering benefits to US residents. This is one of the largest MVPFs in our sample. For
deforestation prevention payments evaluated in Uganda, we find global MVPFs of 5.44 and
a US-only MVPF of around 0.66. That said, not all deforestation programs appear to be as
e↵ective. We find a smaller MVPF for a program in Mexico evaluated in Izquierdo-Tort et al.
(2024), with a global MVPF of 1.71 and a US-only MVPF of 0.1.
We also find large MVPFs for policies that use unique incentive contracts to discourage
rice field burning. We find MVPFs between 10-15 when including global benefits and in the
1.3-1.8 range when only including US benefits. Additionally, we find potentially high returns to
policies encouraging the adoption of wind turbines in India, with a global MVPF of 7.64 and a
US-only MVPF of 0.9.89 As is the case with our primary estimates, we find the lowest MVPFs
for other policies that use rebates to encourage the purchase of other e cient appliances.
In sum, we find potentially high returns - even from a US-only perspective - from policies
that invest in reducing greenhouse gas emissions in developing countries. Indeed, subsidies for
cookstoves and deforestation subsidies in Sierra Leone have higher MVPFs than any domestic
subsidy in our sample, even when only considering the benefits accruing to US residents. That
said, we reiterate three notes of caution. First, our exact MVPF estimates depend on the
incidence of the social costs of carbon and, in particular, whether the benefits accrue in the
form of increased US productivity. Such productivity benefits have US tax revenue implications
that meaningfully impact the net cost of the subsidies to the US government. Second, we find
high variance in our international MVPFs estimates, even within policy categories. Even when
spending within a promising category, high returns are certainly not guaranteed. Finally, our
analysisassumestheUSgovernmentcouldimplementthesepolicieswiththesamecoststructure
as the NGO conducting the evaluation. The US government may face di↵erent administrative
88Table 2 discusses results for additional policies in our extended sample, which includes some policies which
are not a natural fit when considering hypothetical US-based funding. This includes, for example, nudges for
energy reduction in foreign countries.
89We draw upon estimates from Calel et al. (Forthcoming) examining the impact of a wind subsidy in India
on greenhouse gas emissions. The authors argue that at least 52% of installations are inframarginal, suggesting
that the carbon o↵sets are not fully o↵setting carbon emissions. We take that implied inframarginal fraction as
given, rather than a bound, and show that it results in an implied elasticity of -2.2 and an implied MVPF of
7.64. We note that the 52% inframarginal share is a lower bound so the ultimate MVPF could be lower if the
leakage is higher.
46

costs when scaling these programs, meaningfully changing that MVPF. All of that said, the
key lesson from our analysis mirrors the conclusions of Glennerster & Jayachandran (2023):
International aid policies can be a valuable part of the toolkit for addressing climate change.
8 MVPF Versus Cost per Ton
The preceding analysis applies the MVPF framework to analyze the welfare consequences of
US climate change policies. This represents a departure from the typical approach in the
environmental economics literature, which constructs a measure of the cost per ton of CO
2
abated (“cost per ton”). And while existing work tends to refer to “cost per ton” as a singular
object of interest, there are multiple conceptually distinct (and often conflated) definitions
used in the literature. We that find three broad definitions serve to capture the conceptual
distinctions in prior work. We refer to these measures as the (A) resource cost per ton of CO
2
abated, (B) government cost per ton of CO abated, and (C) net social cost per ton of CO
2 2
abated.
In this section, we compare the MVPF with these cost per ton measures. We begin by
discussing the conceptual di↵erences between cost per ton measures and the MVPF. We then
construct an estimate of each cost per ton measure for each of the policies in our sample. We
highlight the ways in which these cost per ton measures fail to fully capture the lessons of the
MVPF approach, often leading to di↵erent rankings across policies.
8.1 Definitions of Cost per Ton
Here, we outline the three common measures of the cost per ton of CO abated and discuss
2
their conceptual drawbacks relative to the MVPF.
Resource Cost per Ton The “resource cost per ton” approach has a long history in envi-
ronmental economics (Grubb et al. 1993). It was popularized in influential work by McKinsey
& Company (Enkvist et al. 2007), which ordered a wide range of abatement technologies using
this measure.90 The resource cost per ton evaluates the desirability of a product (or activity)
by measuring the dollar value of the resources entailed in the production and use of the prod-
uct, divided by the tons of carbon abated. For example, the resource cost of an EV is the
di↵erence in production cost for an EV versus a similar internal combustion engine (ICE) car
minus the lifetime di↵erence in gasoline costs versus electricity costs associated with operating
the car. Similarly, the resource cost of an energy e cient appliance is the di↵erence in cost
of the appliance relative to its less e cient alternative minus the net energy savings from the
more e cient appliance.
90See also the discussion in Gillingham & Stock (2018).
47

There are two conceptual concerns associated with this measure. First, it focuses on a
product or activity (e.g., the purchase of an EV) rather than a policy (e.g., a subsidy for an EV
purchase). In practice, subsidies generate meaningful transfers to inframarginal beneficiaries
– people who would obtain the subsidy without changing their behavior. With its focus on
products rather than policies, the resource cost per ton approach ignores both the benefits and
the costs of those inframarginal transfers. We suggest below that accounting for these transfers
can substantially a↵ect our welfare assessments. Policies with large quantities of inframarginal
transfers may appear to be e↵ective using a resource cost approach, but may be far less e↵ective
using other measures.
Second, when constructing the resource cost of an expenditure, this approach generally
ignores any non-resource costs or benefits. For example, an individual’s valuation of an EV
may be influenced by the disutility from having to find charging stations or the utility from
being able to go 0 to 60 in less than 3 seconds. These considerations are generally excluded
when calculating the resource cost of an expenditure. This omission of non-CO benefits is
2
seen most starkly when considering revenue-raising policies. Applying the resource cost per ton
approach to gasoline taxes suggests negative costs per ton. Society saves the resource costs of
producing gasoline while also reducing emissions. The trouble here is that individuals derive
utility from their resource expenditures and such benefits are generally ignored by the resource
cost per ton.91
Government Cost per Ton The “government cost per ton” of carbon abated measures the
reduction in tons of CO emitted per dollar of net government outlay (Knittel 2009, Gillingham
2
& Tsvetanov 2019).92 Relative to the MVPF approach, this definition uses the denominator of
the MVPF in its numerator (the net government cost of the policy), and compares this to the
tons of carbon abated from the policy. The government cost per ton approach addresses one
of the key criticisms of the resource cost per ton method, accounting for the cost of transfers
to inframarginal beneficiaries. It does not, however, consider the benefits to those individuals.
In other words, inframarginal transfers are treated as a cost but not a benefit. This omission
can create concerns when comparing the government cost per ton to values of the social cost
of carbon.93 A comparison to the SCC often serves as a threshold by which to judge whether
a policy is welfare enhancing. The omissions of inframarginal benefits, however, means that
policies can have costs per ton that exceed the SCC while still delivering large welfare gains.94
91Putanotherway,simplycountingresourcecostsignorescrucialinformationrevealedbyindividualpurchase
decisions.
92This measure is also sometimes referred to as the “program cost per ton” (Gillingham & Tsvetanov 2019,
Davis et al. 2014).
93ThegovernmentcostpertonofCO alsogenerallyomitsothernon-resourcebenefitssuchaslocalpollutants
2
avoided or congestion externalities.
94This particular criticism has been expressed in previous literature. For example, Davis (2023) provides a
discussion of the cost e↵ectiveness of heat pumps and notes “[i]t is tempting to compare the [cost per ton of
CO2 estimates] to estimates in the literature for the social cost of carbon. For example, the U.S. government
currently uses a social cost of carbon of $51 per ton (U.S. Interagency Working Group, 2021) and one recent
48